URL: https://gymgeek.com/calculators/maintenance-calories-calculator/
TITLE: Maintenance Calories Calculator (TDEE) - Gym Geek

To maintain your current weight:

— kcal/day

kcalkJ

 How is this calculated?

1.
Calorie Calculator

2.

Calorie Counter (App Store)

3.
Macro Calculator

4.
Body Mass Index

Activity level

Sedentary

Target weight/BMI

220 lbBMI = 29.8

To LoseConsumeAchieved

0 kg

per week

(maintenance)

—

kcal/day

—

weeks

Your results will appear here

Enter your details in the form above or keep scolling down to learn more

Most Popular Calculators

Calculators to try next:

Calorie Calculator
Our calorie calculator estimates how many calories you should consume to achieve your weight loss or weight gain goal.

Open

Macro Calculator
The macro calculator breaks down your diet into macro ratios. Popular ratios include the 50/30/20 (Standard) and 40/30/30 (Low carb) ratios.

Open

Bulking Calculator
Calories and macros you need to bulk (gain weight), based on your current weight and lbs per week you want to gain.

Open

BMI Calculator
Calculate your Body Mass Index (BMI), based on your weight and height. A healthy BMI is between 18.5 and 24.9.

Open

Ideal Bodyweight Calculator
Find your goal weight to hit your desired BMI. This tool can help you set a realistic weight loss goal.

Open

I have a question about maintenance calories

You can get quick feedback from our online moderated communities. These communities are also a great way to get help using the Gym Geek app. Join us on:

Join us on Facebook

Join us on Reddit

Contact Gym Geek

To contact the Gym Geek team, you can start a live chat from our support page. Our team is online Monday to Friday between 11am and 8pm London time (up to 3pm Eastern time and 12pm Pacific time).

 Open support page
 

 
 

Frequently asked questions

What are my maintenance calories?

Your maintenance calories are the number of calories you need to maintain your current weight, without losing or gaining weight. This number is sometimes called your total daily energy expenditure (TDEE), since if you eat the same number of calories you burn (expend), you will maintain weight. You can estimate your maintenance calories using the Mifflin-St Jeor formula, multiplying by the Standard Activity Factor (SAF) which best reflects your activity level.

How do I calculate my maintenance calories?

Your maintenance calories are equal to your BMR multiplied by your activity level (Maintenance = BMR x SAF). You can estimate your BMR using the Mifflin-St Jeor formula. Your Standard Activity Factor (SAF) ranges from 1.2 for sedentary to 1.55 for moderately active, all the way up to 1.9 for extra active. Simply multiply these two numbers together to calculate your maintenance calories.

How many calories should I eat per day?

The number of calories you should eat to maintain your weight depends on your weight, height, age, gender and activity level. For a woman of healthy weight, it is generally recommended to eat 2,000 calories per day, while men should aim for 2,500 calories. However, you should always use a maintenance calories calculator to get an accurate estimate for your body and activity level.

Regardless of your weight goal, you should never eat less than 1,200 calories if you are a woman and 1,500 calories if you are a man.

How many calories do I burn per day?

It's difficult to measure precisely how many calories you burn each day. A typical man burns 2,000 to 2,500 calories per day, while a woman burns 1,600 to 2,000 calories per day. The exact number of calories will depend on your current weight, metabolism and activity level. You can estimate your daily calorie burn using the Mifflin-St Jeor equation, which is based on a 1990 study that measured the BMR of around 500 people across both genders, all age groups and normal weight and obese persons.

How do I calculate my TDEE?

You can estimate your total daily energy expenditure (TDEE) by multiplying your basal metabolic rate (BMR) with your activity level (TDEE = BMR x SAF). You can estimate your BMR using the Mifflin-St Jeor formula. Your Standard Activity Factor (SAF) ranges from 1.2 for sedentary to 1.55 for moderately active, all the way up to 1.9 for extra active. Simply multiply these two numbers together to calculate your TDEE.

 
 

What is the maintenance calories calculator?

Our maintenance calories calculator helps you understand how many calories you burn each day and estimates how many calories you should consume to maintain your weight over a sustained period of time. 

It outputs your maintenance calories in kilocalories (kcal) or kilojoules (kJ). kcal is the standard measure of calories in most countries around the world, including the United States, while kJ is more common in Australia and New Zealand.

 
 

The calculation is based on your age, gender, height, weight and your level of physical activity. This produces a fairly accurate estimate for most people looking to maintain their current weight. 

To maintain your weight over a long period of time, use the free Gym Geek app. Gym Geek uses Smart Calorie Adjustments™ to adapt to your metabolism, adjusting your maintenance calories up and down to keep your goal on track.

 
 

Explainer video: How to use the maintenance calories calculator

 
 

How does the maintenance calories calculator work?

The maintenance calorie calculator works by taking a number of inputs about you. This includes your height and your current and target weight, as well as your gender, age and activity level.

1. BMR

This first step of the calculation is estimating your Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR). This is the number of calories your body burns at rest. This does not include the calories you burn through physical activity nor the impact of digesting food after you have eaten.

 
 

2. TDEE

Once we have an estimate of your BMR, we then calculate your Total Daily Energy Expenditure (TDEE) estimate. TDEE is a measure of how many calories you burn per day, adding together your BMR along with the calories you burn through physical activity. 

Because TDEE takes into account your activity level (i.e. whether you are sedentary, lightly active, moderately active, etc), it's a more accurate estimate of your daily calorie burn.

TDEE is sometimes called your maintenance calories, since if you eat the same number of calories you burn (expend), you will maintain weight.

In your results, the first number you see is your TDEE (or "maintenance calories"). Your TDEE is shown in kcal (kilocalories) but you can switch to kJ (kilojoules) if you prefer. If you entered a weight loss goal, you will see a range of calories, with the higher number representing your TDEE.

 
 

The calculator will not display any estimates below 1,200 calories for women and 1,500 calories for men. Eating at or below these number of calories is unsafe and you should always consult a doctor or suitably-qualified medical professional before engaging in extreme weight loss plans.

How is BMR calculated?

BMR, or Basal Metabolic Rate, is the number of calories your body needs at total rest to power your most basic functions. This includes the baseline activity of your organs, but does not include the digestion of food. It also doesn’t include any calories you need for physical activity and exercise.

BMR typically increases with your weight and height, because you have a larger body mass to support. However, you can expect your BMR to decrease over time as you age. This is because most people lose muscle mass and gain fat as they age.

 
 

A number of formulas for estimating BMR have been created over time. These formulas are produced by statistical studies that look at representative populations, measuring their BMR and crunching the data to build accurate formulas.

Our calculator uses the Mifflin-St Jeor equation, which came out of a 1990 study of 498 people across both genders, all age groups and normal weight and obese persons. The study introduced a formula based on a person’s weight, height, age and gender.

For men, the formula is 9.99 x Weight + 6.25 x Height – 4.92 x Age + 5.

For women, the formula is 9.99 x Weight + 6.25 x Height – 4.92 x Age – 161.

Is Mifflin-St Jeor accurate?

BMR calculators using Mifflin-St Jeor are fairly accurate for most people. The formula, however, does not account for specific factors like muscle mass. Specifically, if you have a high muscle mass, you may find that Mifflin-St Jeor underestimates your BMR. This is because muscle burns more calories than fat cells at rest.

 
 

If you are overweight or obese, it’s likely that Mifflin-St Jeor will overestimate your BMR.

A study published in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association concluded that the Mifflin-St Jeor equation was more likely to estimate calorie needs to within 10% compared to other equations.

How are maintenance calories (TDEE) calculated?

Our calorie calculator estimates your maintenance calories by multiplying your BMR by an activity level. The activity levels are called Harris-Benedict Standard Activity Factor (SAF) scores, and they range from 1.2 (+20%) to 1.9 (+90%), depending on your level of physical activity.

To estimate your maintenance calories, you will need to determine which SAF score fits your lifestyle best:

Sedentary (SAF = 1.2) – Your daily life involves little to no exercise. You may work a desk-based job and spend your spare time indoors with little physical activity.

Light Activity (SAF = 1.375) – You take part in light exercise or sports 1-3 days per week. If you work in a job where you spend time on your feet for most of the day, this may be an appropriate factor.

Moderate Activity (SAF = 1.55) – You take part in moderate exercise or sports 3-5 days per week. This can include activities like jogging, cycling or swimming for at least 30 minutes each day.

Very Active (SAF = 1.725) – You take part in moderate-to-vigorous exercise or sports 6-7 days per week. This can include running or playing competitive sports.

Extra Active (SAF = 1.9) – You take part in vigorous training two times a day or have job requiring hard physical labor.

Macro breakdown

When planning your diet, your macros are essential. Your macro breakdown is the proportion of your diet made up of carbohydrates, proteins and fats. Carbs provide your body with easy-to-use energy, proteins are the essential building blocks for your muscles and other body tissue and fats help support cell growth, nutrient absorption and the production of hormones.

Our macro calculator is a simple way to get macro estimates (in grams per day) of each macro. It takes into account your current body weight, and sets a minimum protein intake based on nutritional recommendations. It then adjusts your fat and carbohydrate macros to make your overall intake as balanced as possible given your calorie deficit or excess.

 
 

Who should not use the maintenance calorie calculator?

Do not use our maintenance calorie calculator:

If you are pregnant – Our calculator will not provide an accurate reflection of your health status as your body undergoes significant changes during pregnancy. Consult a doctor or medical professional if you are concerned about your weight.

If you have an eating disorder – Always consult a medical professional about your weight.

If you are under the age of 18 – BMR and TDEE estimates are not a suitable measure for children and teens under the age of 18.

References

Keys, A., Taylor, H. L., & Grande, F. (1973). Basal metabolism and age of adult man. Metabolism, 22(4), 579-587.

Fabio Comana, M. S., & PES, C. Comparing Energy Expenditure Prediction Equations.

Mifflin, M. D., St Jeor, S. T., Hill, L. A., Scott, B. J., Daugherty, S. A., & Koh, Y. O. (1990). A new predictive equation for resting energy expenditure in healthy individuals. The American journal of clinical nutrition, 51(2), 241-247.

 
 

Frankenfield, D., Roth-Yousey, L., Compher, C., & Evidence Analysis Working Group. (2005). Comparison of predictive equations for resting metabolic rate in healthy nonobese and obese adults: a systematic review. Journal of the American Dietetic association, 105(5), 775-789.

About this page

Changelog

16 August 2025 - Published maintenance calories calculator, based on previous calorie calculator page that served both purposes. The new landing page is focused specifically on maintenance calories rather than calorie deficits, improving the user experience.

Embed this calculator on your website

Gym Geek’s calculators can be embedded on any website or blog, making it easy for your clients to calculate directly on your website. Using WordPress? Simply add a new block to your post or page and select ‘Custom HTML’ as the type:

Get code

Written by Jane Litfin

Gym Geek’s health and fitness editor.

Updated 15 June 2026

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

DO NOT SELL OR SHARE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION