URL: https://rippedbody.com/how-to-bulk/
TITLE: How to Bulk Up Without Getting Fat

Skip to content

 How to Bulk Up Without Getting Fat

 

To bulk up means to gain bodyweight with the primary goal of gaining muscle.

There is a lack of quality diet advice out there for people trying to bulk. ‘Eat more!’ lacks the detail and finesse to optimize things, ‘Calculate your protein, carb, and fat macros, then just train hard!’ misses a fundamental point — as we advance, calorie and macronutrient needs change, and adjustments are necessary to keep us progressing.

For this reason, we can’t just use a macro calculator and expect to get jacked and juicy without adjusting anything thereafter.

Sure, it’s a good place to start but you’ll get stuck pretty quickly. Perhaps you’ve experienced this already and that’s why you are here?

 How much more should we eat? Of what macro?
 Do macros matter?
 How do I minimize fat gain?
 How do I know when I should adjust my food intake?

You have these questions and many more. This guide has your answers. It’s something people had been bugging me to write for years, but I didn’t feel that I had enough experience to do so without merely parroting things I had read elsewhere and applied to only a handful of clients.

I’m glad that I waited, as coaching a lot of people how to bulk up is the only way I could find out what stuff matters vs. what doesn’t, and come up with my own way of doing things.

This is detailed because it needs to be if you’re going to do this right. But it will save you months of wasted effort down the line. I hope you find it interesting as well as practically helpful when choosing how you wish to bulk up and implementing it successfully.

CONTENTS

Part 1: Factors That Determine The Rate We Can Gain Muscle As We Bulk Up

Part 2: How Quickly We Can Expect To Gain Muscle As We Bulk Up

Part 3: The Three Ways To Bulk Up

Part 4: How to Bulk Up — Comparing Fat and Muscle Gain With Different Methods

Who this guide is for:

This is a guide to adjusting for a bulk. I have a separate Nutrition Setup Guide, Training Guide, Bulking vs. Cutting guide. This is for:

Those that have finished their cut and are looking to turn it around into a bulk.

Those that are currently bulking but have stopped gaining weight and aren’t sure how to make further changes to keep progressing.

Those that have made an initial setup calculation for their bulk and are wondering what comes next.

PART 1: FACTORS THAT DETERMINE THE RATE WE CAN GAIN MUSCLE AS WE BULK UP

If you understand the important factors for muscle growth, you’ll be able to troubleshoot if you run into any issues. So, pay special attention to this section, because you may find the solution to your problems right here.

There is a limit to the amount of muscle mass that we can grow. This is different for everyone.

What is true to all is that the first year of serious training will earn you the biggest gains, with diminishing returns after that. This means that you can look great after just a few years of training, and those years will give you the greatest rewards, as long as you do things right.

Hypothetically, the path to your maximum muscular potential looks as follows.
Figure 1. The possible path to your maximum muscular potential. You will make the most gains in your first years of serious training with diminishing returns after that.

The dot represents the point where the maximum muscular potential is reached. The time frame is in years. The horizontal dotted line afterward shows that no further gains will be made, despite your training efforts, once you reach this point.

Practically, you will never know when you have quite reached your limit. And by the time you do (if you ever do), training will be a part of your life so you wouldn’t quit anyway and it’s not something worth worrying about.

But most people stagnate way before they get remotely close to their genetic potential.

Unless you have been training intelligently for over a decade, it’s best to assume that your stagnation is because you’re screwing something up.

I’m willing to bet that your journey up until now has not been linear. Some time ago, you stagnated for a while, had an “ahah!” moment, fixed the issue, then continued to progress, and then that progress has now slowed. Here’s how that looks:
Figure 2. The realistic path to maximum muscular potential.

The cause of my first training plateau was not eating enough. I was naturally very skinny (150 lbs / 68 kg at ~6’2). When I started training, I grew for a while (to 155 lbs / 72 kg), but then started to stagnate (point 1) and plateaued pretty quickly after that (point 2) at 162 lbs / 75 kg.

It took me five years to realize this mistake — how to bulk up — then fix it (point 3).

My next plateau was caused by not training hard and frequently enough (point 4). But by the time I figured that out, I had bought every supplement under the sun, as the muscle mags told me, thinking that the next one was the cure. 

How many of your fellow gym members look the same as they did two years ago? And yet, what percentage of them do you think have hit their genetic limit? And yet, how many of them take the time to look at the reasons why vs. just coming back day-after-day, repeating the same things, and expecting a different outcome?

The problem is that what brought them to where they are now will not take them to where they want to be. Something has to change, but they don’t know what. If this is you, this section of the guide will help you figure that out.

Here are the factors that determine the rate at which we can grow in descending order of importance. All but the first are under our control.

Genetics (and drug use)

Calorie intake

Sufficient training stimulus to force adaptation

Sufficient protein intake

Sufficient sleep

Stress

Body-fat percentage

Everything else. (Fat-carb macronutrient intake, micronutrients, meal timing & frequency, supplements.)

If you look at the list carefully, you’ll see that the top two items on the list — genetics (and drug use) and calorie intake — come ahead of training. What this means is that people can go about their training in a sub-optimal manner, but if they are genetically gifted enough and eat enough, they can get away with it.

This explains a lot of the stupid advice out there in the  fitness industry. These people do not need to pay as much attention to the rest of the factors. Most have decided not to.

1. GENETICS (AND DRUG USE)

Genetics play an enormous role in how well people respond to training.

We all know people at the gym who train with seemingly little effort but are huge. You probably know someone who grew like a weed when they started training and overtook you.

This is unfair, but so is life. Your genetics are genetics; you need to play the hand you are dealt with and be the best you can. Here’s how genetics affect the maximum rate of muscle growth.
Figure 3. How genetics affect the path to maximum muscular potential. The “pre-training baseline” point will differ, and sporting background will determine how far along our lines we have already moved before we start lifting.

The three lines show someone of average, above-average, and a below-average genetic predisposition for muscle growth.

The main point I want to make here is that you shouldn’t look at someone who is bigger than you and assume that they have some special knowledge, and it’s prudent to not look at a smaller guy and assume they don’t know what they are doing.

Some of the most technically knowledgable people in the industry have good, but not outstanding physiques. This makes a lot of sense when you think about it — frustration with their own results led them to study harder.

Genetics for growth appear to be somewhat (not for all individuals, but when comparing populations) related to the starting point. We can see this when comparing growth rates for men and women. When they do the same program, absolute growth for men is higher, but they gain the same % of lean mass in relation to their starting lean mass. So, if you take two untrained individuals of the same height, with similar sporting histories, but different starting levels of lean mass, we can expect the bigger guy to grow bigger and more muscled overall. — Pretty much what common sense would tell us anyway.

Should we worry about our genetics then?

I’d argue not.

Whether you are genetically blessed, average, or screwed, the way you should approach things does not change.

It’s statistically unlikely that you’re in the genetically unlucky category and it doesn’t serve you well to believe that you are one of the unlucky ones either.
Figure 4. The distribution of genetic luck for muscle growth. You may be one of the unlucky ones, but the odds are that you’re genetically average. So don’t throw yourself a pity party, assume that you can figure this out, and work with what you have got.

The mind has an incredibly powerful effect on the body. So much so that you can actually give people sugar pills, tell them that they are steroids, and they will grow for a time like they are on steroids. (Yes, I shit you not that has actually been studied.)

So while you probably know by now whether you’re one of the genetically lucky ones, it does not benefit you to buy into some sob story that you are one of the genetically unlucky ones either. The chances are that this isn’t the case anyway.

How Drugs Affect Growth Rate and Muscular Potential

Steroid use increases the rate at which you can grow, and allows for growth beyond natural limits.

There is a dose-response relationship, which means the more you use, the more pronounced this effect. For comparison, 5’10 bodybuilders competing in natural federations typically have a stage weight of 170–180 lbs (~78-82 kg). Seven-time Mr. Olympia winner, Phil Heath, is 5’9 (~175cm) and weighed an estimated 250 lbs (~114 kg) on stage.

So, at the extremes, drug use can make a lot of difference. This is represented by a dramatic shift upwards and inwards of the curve, orange to purple.
Figure 5. How drug use affects muscle growth. Note how both the rate of muscle growth and the total muscle growth achievable increases.

Steroid use comes with considerable health risks, as well as potential jail time, depending on local laws. I do not recommend them, and I do not work with people who use them.

This is not a moral judgment, I just have neither the knowledge nor desire to go into this area. This guide is written for natural trainees who are looking to figure out what they need to do.

2. CALORIE INTAKE

Failure to eat enough is top of the list for places where people go wrong when bulking. We cannot make something out of nothing.

Muscle growth is not optimized in a calorie deficit; however, at higher levels of body fat, our body can be in a calorie deficit and still build muscle. That is because your body will use fat stores to fuel itself.

However, as we get leaner and more advanced, this becomes increasingly difficult to achieve, and eventually, we will stop gaining any more muscle mass regardless of what we do.
Figure 6. How insufficient calorie intake limits muscle growth over time. This is the cause of many people’s stagnation.

If you are struggling to gain weight (your weight is not steadily increasing over the weeks), you need to eat more. It does not matter what your calculations said should happen: you may have miscalculated, you may be miscounting your food intake, or you might be a high NEAT responder. (I’ll come back to this later.)

• Related article: Coaching Lessons #4 – Tracking Trumps Calculations

3. APPROPRIATE TRAINING STIMULUS TO FORCE ADAPTATION

It should go without saying that if you do not have sufficient training stimulus to force adaptations, then you will not grow muscle. The majority of the calorie surplus will be stored as fat. See my article, The Core Principles of Effective Training, for more on this.

When there is an insufficient training stimulus, the weight you gain is almost exclusively fat
Figure 7. Where there is an insufficient training stimulus, the weight gained when bulking is almost exclusively fat, rather than the 1:1 ratio of fat and muscle gain that is typical. This is also an issue many people face after they cut and realize they have achieved nothing.

4. SUFFICIENT PROTEIN INTAKE

You need to have a sufficient level of protein intake for tissue repair and growth. Insufficient protein intake will shift the curve in a similar way to insufficient calorie intake, but to a less severe degree.

How big the impact of is will depend on how far off of optimal intake is. I’ve tried to capture this here:
Figure 8. Where there is insufficient protein intake (left), the curve shifts down to the right (right). The more protein is lacking, the greater the effect.

5/6. SUFFICIENT SLEEP AND MANAGEMENT OF STRESS

Insufficient sleep and a high level of stress will hamper recovery from your workouts and your growth. This becomes increasingly important as we progress. Before I take a coaching applicant on as a client, I check to see that these elements are on point first.

Please take your sleep and stress management seriously, as it will flatten the curve and shift it down and towards the right, similar to what you see above.

 Related: Stress: In The Gym, Out of The Gym, and How it Affects Your Program and Progress

7. BODY-FAT PERCENTAGE

There are calorie partitioning benefits to being leaner.

This means that in general, the fatter we get, any calorie surplus has a tendency towards more fat storage than muscle growth. This happens because chronic, low-grade inflammation associated with obesity decreases the anabolic, and increases catabolic, signaling in the muscles.

You can still gain muscle (sumo wrestlers carry the highest muscle mass of any sport), it’s just that an increasing amount of the weight you gain will be fat.
Figure 9. The fatter you get, the more fat you’ll store as you continue to bulk. Avoid dream bulking, where people simply eat their faces off, gaining an enormous amount of weight and kidding themselves that it is mostly muscle.

So, is there a limit to the amount of body fat we should allow ourselves to gain when bulking? I’d argue so, yes. Cutting also. But these are not hard cut-off points, only guidelines.

[Note: Women carry ~8% more essential fat and should add 8% to all guidelines.]
Figure 10. Anabolic signaling tends to drop off under ~10% body fat and after ~20% body fat. This gives us the recommended range to stay between when cycling cut and bulk phases.

 I recommend that you don’t bulk past 20% body fat.

It is unclear whether someone who bulks from 12% body fat will have a calorie partitioning advantage over someone who starts bulking at 18%, but there are clear aesthetic advantages. Also, importantly, as we move past 20%, there are increased health risks.

For that reason, I recommend that people cap their bulk cycles at 20% body fat. This means that I recommend people only start to bulk once they are below 15% body fat because otherwise, they won’t have enough uninterrupted time to bulk before they need to cut again.

I recommend that you don’t cut beyond 10% body fat if your intention is to bulk right after.

The natural reaction to knowing that body fat will be gained in a bulking phase is that people tend to want to get as lean as possible prior to starting. But to attempt to keep your abs year-round is a common mistake.

If you wish to diet town to below 10% body fat and hang out there for a while, perhaps because you want to look your best for the summer season, that’s cool.

But if your intention with cutting is to only prepare yourself for the bulk, don’t go far past 10% body fat, as hormonal function (and therefore anabolic signaling) tends to be a little off, so your training efforts are likely to be in vain.

Therefore, I recommend you keep their cut–bulk cycles between ~10 and 20% body fat.

 Here’s my full gallery of body-fat percentage pictures.

8. EVERYTHING ELSE

This includes the ratio of your fat-carb macronutrient intake for the remainder of your calorie budget after protein, micronutrients, nutrient timing, and supplements.)

The importance of each of these increases as we advance with our training and get closer to our genetic potential. See my free nutrition setup guide for more.

PART 2: HOW QUICKLY WE CAN EXPECT TO GAIN MUSCLE WHEN BULKING UP

So we know that our level of training advancement determines our rate of muscle growth potential, which decreases with experience. (Contrast this to when we have a fat-loss goal, where body-fat percentage  determines how quickly we can lose fat and has nothing to do with training experience.)

By categorizing our training advancement, we can get a reasonable estimate of the amount of muscle we can hope/expect to gain per month. This is useful to know when setting calorie intake and body weight gain targets so that we avoid gaining too quickly (and thus putting on an unnecessary amount of fat), or gaining more slowly than we otherwise could have.

CLASSIFYING TRAINING EXPERIENCE

Classifying training advancement is difficult, but I like to split it into the following four categories and define them as follows:

Beginner: New to serious training, first few months.

Novice: Still able to progress most training loads on a week to week basis.

Intermediate: Able to progress most training loads on a month-to-month basis.

Advanced: Progress is evident only when viewed over multiple months or a year.

RATES OF MUSCLE GAIN POTENTIAL

Here is a rough breakdown of the rate of muscle growth the average person can expect if they do everything right:

Beginner: 1–1.5% of body weight per month.

Novice: 0.75–1.25% of body weight per month.

Intermediate: 0.5–0.75% of body weight per month.

Advanced: Less than 0.5% of body weight per month.

We will use these numbers to help us set our monthly bodyweight gain targets, depending on which of the three ways we choose to bulk. (But as you will see, I only really recommend just the one.)

PART 3: THE THREE WAYS TO BULK UP

Straight talk — I have never seen anyone gain a significant amount of muscle without also gaining fat.

The only exceptions to this are skinny, new trainees and those who have had a long lay-off from training where they lost a significant amount of muscle.

I say this because I want to be clear — you will gain some fat when you bulk. The only question is how much fat you will gain, which is determined by how fast you set your rate of weight gain.

I view there as being three two legitimate ways to successfully bulk, each with their pros and cons:

The relaxed bulk aims to maximize the rate of muscle growth without requiring the counting of calories or macros. More fat is gained using this method, and it’s considered the acceptable trade-off for simplicity.

The lean bulk aims to maximize levels of leanness, while still adding muscle mass. The changes are the hardest to measure, and I don’t recommend it.

The controlled/slow bulk aims to maximize the rate of muscle growth while accepting some fat gain. This is the easiest to make clear progress while minimizing fat gain. This is what I recommend.

For all options, the underlying assumption is that whether for appearance or athletic reasons, our goal is to build a more muscled version of ourselves. Whichever method is chosen, you’ll diet off any fat gained later.

THE RELAXED BULK

The Relaxed Bulk aims to maximize the rate of muscle growth without requiring the counting of calories or macros. More fat is gained using this method, and it’s considered the acceptable trade-off for simplicity.

The rate of muscle growth can still be maximized, even if you don’t focus on counting macros, as long as you’re conscious of getting in enough protein and you eat enough.

You’ll aim to gain weight significantly faster than your potential to gain muscle (and the other two methods of bulking). Fat gain will be higher as a result, but you choose not to care due to the ease of it.
Figure 11. More fat is gained than muscle with a relaxed bulk, but you choose not to care due to the ease of it.

A relaxed bulk should not be confused with a dream bulk — where people simply eat their faces off, gaining an enormous amount of weight and kidding themselves that it is mostly muscle. In contrast, when we use this relaxed bulk method we remain conscious of our maximal rates of muscle growth potential.

HOW TO IMPLEMENT A RELAXED BULK

I recommend the following rates of weight gain when executing a relaxed bulk:

Beginner & Novice Relaxed Bulk: ~3% of body weight per month.

Intermediate Relaxed Bulk: ~2% of body weight per month.

Advanced Relaxed Bulk: ~1% of body weight per month.

Your calorie intake will be 2.0–2.5x your maximum muscular gain potential, which is sufficiently high enough that a lack of attention paid to the macros won’t compromise it, as you’re unlikely to fall short on any of them.

 A 160 lb lean, novice trainee will aim to gain ~5 lbs per month (160 lbs * 3%)

 A 180 lb intermediate trainee will aim to gain ~3.5 lbs per month (180 lbs * 2%)

If you gain more than your target rate of weight gain, reduce your food intake. If you gain less than the target, increase your food intake. If you find yourself struggling to auto-regulate like this without counting, then consider starting to count as per the controlled bulk method.

THE (THEORETICAL) LEAN BULK

The lean bulk aims to maximize levels of leanness, while still adding muscle mass.

Theoretically, this can be achieved by making increases to calorie and macro intake only enough to allow progressions with our training (indicating muscle gain). In practice, I haven’t seen anyone achieve this without losing their minds because of the slow rate of progression, which makes it exceptionally hard to manage.

We know that we cannot maximize muscle growth rate with this method, but I can’t say for sure what percentage of the maximal growth rate we can achieve on average. I suspect half or less, which means you will aim to gain weight at less than 1/3 the rate of the other methods.
Figure 12. The total rate of weight change with the Lean Bulk is so slow that it’s hard to manage. It’s theoretically possible, but in practice, very hard to achieve.

For this reason, it requires a lot more patience as the changes are far more subtle, and in the short term, you may not be able to measure them. This requires faith in the principle that if you are progressing with your training, then you are gaining muscle, but most people cannot do this without losing their minds.

This style is only really suitable for experienced trainees, that place a premium on maximal leanness, and are very confident that they know what they are doing with their training and diet. This is something that the professional figure model needs to do to stay employed.

From my point of view as a coach, this does not lend itself well to coaching because the changes are often too subtle to keep people motivated and feel value for their money. The reasons for this will become evident when we get to the comparison graphs section below.

HOW TO IMPLEMENT A LEAN BULK

You need to start from a low body fat to use this method. This is because you will be using a combination of the photos, stomach measurements, and body-fat calipers (a case where I recommend these) to gauge whether you have gained fat or muscle.

If you have been dieting (which you probably will have) then:

Add calories to bring yourself to maintenance calorie intake.

Make small increases of 100–150 kcal (scaling with body size) to daily calorie intake when your training fails to progress.

If you haven’t been dieting and your body weight is stable, then just skip the first part of this.

If you are currently gaining weight at more than the expected rate of muscle growth, then consider cutting back calorie intake slightly.

LEAN BULK EXAMPLE ADJUSTMENTS

Imagine you’re an advanced trainee, 180 lbs, 10% body fat, have just finished dieting, and you were losing 0.75 lbs per week. Here’s how you’d go about transitioning into the lean bulk.

1. It takes a 500 kcal daily deficit to lose 1 lb per week. So, add back in 375 kcal. (0.75 *500)

2. Make this increase via your preferred mix of carbs and fats. So, 10 g of fat and 70 g of carbs, for example.

3. Wait and track things over a couple of weeks. If you feel more energetic in the gym and training starts improving, but you see that your weight is still dropping slightly, make another increase. This time you increase by ~200 kcal, 5 g of fat, and 40 g of carbs.

4. Over the next couple of weeks, strength starts improving. But your weight has come up by three pounds! Is it fat? The photos and body-fat caliper measurements show no difference, but the stomach measurements have increased. This tells you that there is no fat gain, just an increase in glycogen, gut content, and water. Don’t change your macros.

5. Four weeks later, your training progression has stalled. Body-fat appears unchanged. Make another increase, this time ~150 kcal, adding 5 g of fat, 25 g of carbs.

Keep on making fine-tune adjustments to your macros like this to keep progressing with your training without any fat gain.

This is theoretical. I haven’t seen someone succeed in practice. And before you think you’re the exception and go ahead anyway, part four will show why this method will lead to slower physique progress over the years than the controlled bulk, even if you manage to implement it successfully.

Trust me, I wish we could all stay lean year-round, but it just isn’t realistic to do so and make meaningful progress.

THE CONTROLLED/SLOW BULK

The controlled bulk aims to maximize the rate of muscle growth while accepting some fat gain.

Of the three methods we’re covering in this article, this is the one I use with coaching clients because it leads to the clearest signs of progress without leaving them with a lot of fat to cut off after the bulk. (It’s the controlled bulk method for which I have set the macro calculator.)
Figure 12. Gaining muscle and fat in a 1:1 ratio is a realistic outcome when you get a controlled bulk right.

TARGET RATES OF WEIGHT GAIN FOR THE CONTROLLED BULK

I recommend the following rates of weight gain when executing a controlled bulk:

Beginner Controlled Bulk: 2% of body weight per month.

Novice Controlled Bulk: 1.5% of body weight per month.

Intermediate Controlled Bulk: 1% of body weight per month.

Advanced Controlled Bulk: 0.5% of body weight per month.

We know that some fat will be gained when we bulk; therefore, we know that to achieve our maximal rate of muscle growth, we have to gain weight at a higher rate than that. But how much higher should we set our rates of body weight gain? Research can’t tell us this, but experience coaching people leaves clues on what is appropriate.

Over the years, the average client has gained muscle and fat in a 1:1 ratio. Sometimes the results are a little better, and sometimes they are a little worse. I’m fairly sure the differences between clients are down to genetic luck rather than effort, as I tend to work with people who truly give it their all.

HOW TO IMPLEMENT A CONTROLLED BULK

Step 1: Calculate the initial calorie adjustment.

Step 2: Adjust your macros and track progress over five weeks.

Step 3: Adjust calorie and macro intake, if necessary.

Step 4: Track progress. Adjust calorie intake again when necessary.

 It takes roughly ~2500 kcal to build 1 lb of muscle and ~3500 kcal to burn or store 1 lb of fat.

As people typically gain fat and muscle in a 1:1 ratio in a bulk phase, and if we assume a 30 day month, this means we need a 100 kcal daily caloric surplus to gain 1 lb of weight per month (~220 kcal for 1 kg).

However, just as the body has mechanisms to frustrate our dieting efforts (metabolic downregulation) in an attempt to ward off starvation, there are mechanisms that kick in to combat a calorie surplus. These aren’t as powerful as when we are dieting (historically, we were far less likely to eat ourselves to death than starve to death), but they vary from individual to individual.

A big one is called NEAT (non-exercise activity thermogenesis). It is the energy expended for everything we do that is not sleeping, eating, or sports-like exercise.

Just as some people experience more lethargy than others when dieting, dropping their NEAT, some people get more active than others when bulking (they start fidgeting more throughout the day, for example). This is impossible to predict, but I suggest we add 50%, which gives the following heuristic:

 To gain 1 lb of weight per month, add 150 kcal each day (330 kcal for 1 kg).

NEAT, along with hunger-fullness signaling differences, explains why some people have a hard time gaining weight. You’ll see them referred to as ‘hardgainers.’ There’s nothing wrong; they just have to eat more or ignore hunger signals more.

Additionally, those who have been dieting prior will find that they can eat more than just the calculated energy difference of their weekly fat-loss rate as their hormones come back into balance, and metabolisms speed back up to normal.

This means that there isn’t a single calculation we can do to set our calorie intake perfectly for the duration of a bulk. We need to track how the scale weight changes over time and adjust continually, hence why this is a multi-step process.

Controlled BULK EXAMPLE ADJUSTMENTS

Step 1: The initial calorie And Macro adjustment

If you haven’t been tracking your weight or calorie intake up until now, just use the macro calculator and then track your progress like this for 5 weeks.

If you have, we have the opportunity to be a little more accurate as we can base the adjustments off of your data. I’ll use two examples to explain how to do this.

1) A 160 lb lean, novice trainee, currently not gaining or losing any weight.

As he is not currently gaining or losing weight, he is at approximately maintenance calories. We will target a weight gain of 1.5% per month, which is 2.4 lbs.

Therefore, he needs to increase daily caloric intake by 360 kcal per day (2.4 lbs * 150 kcal).

2) A 180 lb intermediate trainee, finished his cut to shreds, recently losing 1.0 lbs per week.

He is currently in an approximate 500 kcal daily deficit and will target a weight gain of 1% per month, which is 1.8 lbs.

Therefore, he needs to increase daily caloric intake by 770 kcal per day (500 + 1.8 * 150).
My buddy, Ben Carpenter’s ‘Slow Bulk’. ~20 lb gain in body weight – some of which will simply be from the glycogen & water regain aside from the muscle & fat mass increases.
STEP 2: ADJUST YOUR MACROS and TRACK PROGRESS OVER FIVE WEEKS

So this brings us on the macronutrients — how much of each should we increase to reach these new calorie requirements?

 I recommend you leave protein as it is and increase your carb and fat intake in a 3:1 ratio.

A 1 lb increase of muscle per month would bump up our protein requirements by ~1g. That is a minor amount, and I don’t think it’s worth adjusting for.

For carbs and fats, if I look back through the data with clients, what seems to have worked best on average is something like an approximate 75–25 split in favor of carbs. When I wrote The Muscle and Strength Pyramid: Nutrition book with Eric Helms, this jived with his experience also, and we recommend fat intakes in the 20–30% of total calorie intake range when at maintenance or bulking, 15-25% when cutting.

Recall from the Nutrition Setup Guide and How To Make Meals Out Of Your Macros guide that 1 g of protein and carbohydrate = ~4 kcal, 1 g of fat = ~9 kcal.

1) Our novice trainee needs a 360 kcal increase per day.

He doesn’t have a strong preference for carbs vs. fats, so he splits things 75% carbs, 25% fats.

This gives him a daily increase of 10 g fat, ~65 g carbs. (10 * 9 kcal + 67.5 * 4 kcal = 360 kcal)

2) Our intermediate trainee needs a 770 kcal increase per day.

As he’s been dieting, fat intake likely had to be cut down to the lower end of the recommended range to keep carb intake high enough to support the training. Now we can push this back up. Therefore, we’ll skew the first calorie increase a little more toward fat.

This gives him a daily increase of 25 g fat, 135 g carbs. (25 * 9 kcal + 136.25 * 4 kcal = 770 kcal)

STEP 3: ADJUST CALORIE INTAKE, IF NECESSARY

Take a look at your average rate of weight change over the last five weeks. Ignore the change that happened in the first week and calculate the average rate of weight change per week over the last four weeks.

 Add or subtract 150 kcal per pound (330 kcal/ kg) you are off your monthly target to your calorie intake each day.

Let’s consider what this might look like for our two trainees.

1) Here’s the scale weight data for our 160 lb novice trainee, aiming to gain 2.4 lbs per month, since the calorie and macro change:

160 » 162 lbs

162.4 lbs

162.9 lbs

163.2 lbs

163.4 lbs

We ignore the first week’s bump, which will have muscle glycogen, gut content, and water in the mix.

The change from the end of week 1 to the end of week 5 has been 1.4 lbs. This is 1 lb short of the monthly target, so he needs to add 150 kcal to his daily calorie intake. He does that by adding 25 g of carbs, 5 g of fat.

2) Here’s the scale weight data for our 180 lb intermediate trainee, aiming to gain 1.8 lbs per month, since the calorie and macro change:

180 » 186.1 lbs

186.3 lbs

186.5 lbs

186.8 lbs

186.9 lbs

You can see there is a bigger bump in weight in the first week for our intermediate trainee because this calorie increase was bigger. We’ll ignore this for the same reasons also.

The change from the end of week 1 to the end of week 5 has been 0.8 lbs. This is also 1 lb short of the monthly target, so he needs to add 150 kcal to his daily calorie intake. He does that by adding ~25 g of carbs, 5 g of fats.

STEP 4: ADJUST CALORIE INTAKE AGAIN WHEN NECESSARY

Repeat step 3 every five weeks and adjust if necessary. I don’t recommend that you adjust more frequently than this — the changes when bulking are small, the scale weight can fluctuate, it requires a longer time period then dieting to tease out true changes from noise.

Here’s how this might all look:

Our 160 lb lean, novice trainee’s first serious bulk

ScheduleInitial macros (pcf)1st adjustment2nd adjustment

Training day160/455/70160/520/80160/555/85

Rest day160/260/90160/325/100160/350/105

Our 180 lb intermediate trainee, bulking after dieting to shreds

ScheduleEnd of diet macros1st adjustment2nd adjustment

Training day180/250/40180/385/65180/410/70

Rest day180/100/60180/235/85180/260/90

The intermediate trainee will likely have to make a few further adjustments as their metabolic rate comes back up to normal levels after the diet.

PART 4: HOW TO BULK UP — COMPARING FAT AND MUSCLE GAIN WITH DIFFERENT METHODS

If I didn’t send you to sleep halfway through reading this, you’ll know that the method I recommend is the controlled bulk. Here are some comparisons of different scenarios justifying that position. I am assuming the same starting level of leanness for all.

Ultimately, you need to choose a method based on your effort-reward preference. It needs to be a method that you can be consistent with, and this will come down to the tug of your social life vs. satisfaction derived from staying lean or seeing progress.

1. BULKING PHASE COMPARISONS

Imagine three identical triplets decide to do each of the three methods. They are all starting from the same ‘shredded’ level of leanness. Here is how a 6-month bulk phase would look:
Figure 13. A comparison of the gaining phase for the three bulking methods.

By the 6-month mark, the relaxed and controlled bulk methods have resulted in the same amount of total muscle gain and are clearly ahead of the lean bulk method.

However, looking at this 6-month snapshot is a false comparison; we are going to want to lose the fat that is gained after we have bulked. So, let’s extend the time frame to include the cut phase and see what happens to our three identical triplets.

 Muscle Mass Increases: Slow bulk = Relaxed bulk > Lean gains.

2. Cut Comparison When There Is A Sudden Deadline To Get Shredded

In this first example, I’ll assume that there is a sudden deadline (competition or photoshoot) set for our guys two months out. They have to get back down to baseline leanness — that shredded state they had before — or they lose their jobs, sponsorship, etc. Here’s how that would look:
Figure 14. A comparison of overall lean mass levels after a sudden 2-month deadline is imposed.

The controlled bulk guy has time to get back down to base-level leanness, with minimal lean mass losses.

The relaxed bulk guy has to rush his cut; he loses more and more lean mass as the weeks progress. This happens because he has to force his body to lose fat at a rate higher than it can do so without muscle losses.

The lean bulk guy does not need to cut; he continues to gain mass very steadily.

 Net Muscle Mass Increases: Slow bulk > Lean gains > Relaxed bulk.

3. Cut Comparison when a Deadline Is Known In Advance

Alright, so you’re going to call me out on the previous example and say that this doesn’t apply to most people, that people will not rush their cut and lose muscle mass. I’d argue that the majority of people make this mistake (setting false deadlines for themselves and wasting their hard-earned gains), but we, being educated about these things, are not them. Fair enough.

So, let’s say you have a deadline a long way in advance — a long beach holiday, for example — and you want to look your best by that point. Here’s how that would look:
Figure 15. A comparison of the overall lean mass levels when the deadline is known in advance.

The situation is the same as the previous example for the controlled bulk and lean bulk guy. The former can cut at the same time; the latter can continue until his holiday.

The relaxed bulk guy has to start his cut much earlier. His bulk phase is shorter than the slow-bulk guy so the muscle gain is lower, but he achieves a greater overall gain than the lean gains guy.

 Net Muscle Mass Increases: Slow bulk > Relaxed bulk > Lean bulk.

4. WHAT HAPPENS WHEN PEOPLE CUT FOR SUMMER

Ok, so let’s say that there is no deadline to get shredded, and both the controlled bulk and relaxed bulk methods start their cut at the same time.

Now, before you hammer me for being nonsensical, I’d point out that this is what most people do: bulk for the majority of the year and then cut for the summer period, starting the same time each year (usually May), irrespective of how much body fat they are carrying. This is because they don’t want to compromise their ‘off-season’ bulk time frame, and is usually accompanied by complaints that they never seem to be able to get shredded in time for summer.

Here’s how that looks assuming they don’t rush the cut to the point muscle mass is lost any more than normal:
Figure 16. A comparison of the overall lean mass levels when people follow the typical path of getting ready for summer.

The lean bulk guy does not need to cut; he can continue to grow throughout summer gradually.

It takes the relaxed bulk guy until the end of summer to get to maximal leanness, but he feels far too fat at the start, and this affects his enjoyment at the beach, possibly choosing not to go for the first month of summer.

The slow bulk guy gets to maximal leanness by early-mid summer and can seek to maintain that condition, or move on into a slow-bulk phase. If the slow bulk phase is started immediately upon hitting maximal leanness (as depicted in the graph above), there will be a small amount of fat regain, but arguably low enough to remain in good beach condition before the end of the summer. This is worth considering if you wish to maximize your gains in the coming year as it will give you a longer bulking period.

 Net Muscle Mass Increases: Slow bulk > Relaxed bulk > Lean bulk.

5. WHAT HAPPENS WHEN Setting AN UPPER LIMIT TO BODY-FAT PERCENTAGE

Imagine that you wish to bulk but don’t want to go past a certain level of body fat so that you can stay in year-round good condition. This way, you will feel comfortable taking your shirt off at any time.

Let’s call this 15% body fat — a level where with enough muscle mass, you will still look good. (15% body fat when you are weak and carry very little muscle doesn’t.) You will bulk until you hit 15% and then start your cut. Thus, to the outsider, you will always look somewhere between good condition and great condition.

It is difficult to assess body-fat percentage accurately using the methods we have available, so I would recommend using a combination of my visual guide to body-fat percentage, and the US Navy Method of Body-fat Estimation.

Here’s how the three different methods of bulking compare over a longer period:
Figure 17: Comparing the three different bulking strategies, you can see that the controlled bulk leads to the most muscle mass gain after two bulk-cut cycles. Frankly, I think I’ve been a little generous with the relaxed bulk here and the outcome is likely worse.
For the lean bulk, with no cutting period, gains can be made throughout.

The slow bulk method allows us to have longer bulking periods and more time spent growing overall, which leads to greater muscle mass increases.

With the relaxed bulk method, bulking periods have to be shorter because the cut phase has to start sooner. Thus the overall time spent gaining muscle is shorter, and less muscle mass gained.

Over longer time periods (in the above we have ~17 months), the slow bulk guy makes more progress towards their maximum muscular potential than the other two methods.

Note how the lean bulk approach is not far behind the relaxed bulk in terms of growth over longer time frames in this situation. However, I just want to emphasize – due to the patience that it requires and the subtlety of the changes people often lose their minds before being successful with the lean bulk method of bulking.

Thus, with the exclusion of special populations, when it comes to client work, I find myself recommending and guiding people through controlled bulks.

 Long-Term Net Muscle Mass Increases: Slow bulk > Relaxed bulk > Lean gains.

Thank you for reading. To learn more about adjustments for bulking, maintenance, cutting, and the transition phases between them, check out my book, The Diet Adjustments Manual.

Questions welcomed in the comments. 

– Andy

How To Bulk Q&A

What should I eat to bulk?
The foods you should eat to bulk are the same as those when you cut; you’ll simply have more of them and room for ‘treats.’

Your diet should be rich in fruits, vegetables, and have sufficient protein (1 g/lb of body weight per day). The rest should be made up of predominantly fresh and unprocessed foods. These things will help keep you full when dieting, help ensure muscle mass retention, and cover your micronutritional needs.

This advice does not change when you bulk. However, because you have a higher calorie budget, you can fit in calorie-dense treats that you might crave from time to time. These should not come at the cost of nutrient-dense foods (fruits and vegetables).

Most clients eat the same kind of diet year-round; they just increase or decrease their carb intake and frequency that they eat out. I like to have a bowl of cereal with a chocolate protein shake made with skimmed milk to meet my carb requirements. Here’s my guide to making meals out of your macros.

How can I bulk up fast?
Most answers to the question of how to bulk up fast focus on foods people should eat. But the simple fact of the matter is that there is no way to bulk up faster than your genetic potential. If you do, you’re just getting fat.

Recall from the start of this guide that how fast you can grow depends on your genetics, calorie intake, training quality, sufficient protein intake, sleep quality, and stress levels. Make sure you take each of these seriously. Refer to the How Quickly Can We Gain Muscle As We Bulk? section, so that you know what rate of weight gain to target. This will stop you from progressing more slowly than you otherwise could, but more commonly, getting fat.

Are bananas good for bulking?
The average 125 g banana has 27 g of carbs with just 3 g of fiber. This means they’re relatively high in carbs and low in fiber, so you’re unlikely to poop yourself if you eat a lot of bananas to hit your carb requirements (unlike with other fruits).

However, roughly half of the carbs will be fructose content. Fructose is processed differently to the glucose you get from the carbs in rice, potatoes, bread, and pasta. So while it would be fine to eat several bananas per day, it’s probably not optimal to rely on them exclusively to meet your carbohydrate needs.

Is rice good for bulking up?
Yes, rice is good for bulking up but no better than pasta, bread, potatoes, or other starchy sources to meet your carb requirements. Feel free to choose what you enjoy and make sure you don’t skimp on protein intake, of the other 9 critical factors for bulking up that I cover in this guide.

Where can I find out about macros, meal timing, and supplements?
These are covered in my Nutrition Setup Guide.

How should I train?
Click the training tab in the menu to see a list of sample programs from my Muscle and Strength Training Pyramid book.

What should I do when I want to cut?
Here’s my guide for macro adjustments when cutting. But if this topic interests you, check out my book: The Diet Adjustments Manual.

About The Author

 
Andy Morgan
 
Hi! The Ripped Body® Method is an evidence-based, data-driven approach to physique transformation.
⠀
For the majority of my 20s, I fell for the scams of the fitness industry. 
⠀
This site is my revenge. 
⠀
Since 2011, I’ve written guides explaining how we get results to help readers avoid the same path of frustration. We’ve helped over 2,000 busy working guys transform their bodies WITHOUT supplements, fad diets, or the process dominating their lives.
⠀
 Enter your email address in the box at the bottom of this page and I'd be honored to show you how.

Privacy policy.

 464 Comments

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Brian L.

 

 
 April 7, 2025 12:34

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
I have been following your newsletter and website for quite a while and have a question about bulking. I am training for calisthenics, and wanted to put on more muscle. I am 5 ft 7 and weigh 135 lbs. Estimated BF% around 14% (waist 30″, neck 13″).

I have always wanted to lean bulk, been doing that for 6 months and seeing slow results. (Weekly average weight fluctuates <0.5lb but I was able to progress with calisthenics skills). I would like to try the controlled/slow bulk method, but afraid that the additional fat gain would affect my calisthenics skills. Your training program consists of bodybuilding and powerlifting. 

Do you have any suggestions for bulking up with calisthenics training?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 April 7, 2025 12:36

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Brian L.
 

 

 
Hi Brian,

If you’re struggling to gain muscle at a satisfactory rate (measurable, manageable, motivational) with the “lean bulk,” then you’re right to switch to the slow/controlled bulk.

You will gain some fat and with the muscle. This is unavoidable.

This extra weight may negatively affect some of your body weight (calisthenics) training, meaning that you can’t quite do as many reps or have the same level of endurance. (I say “may” because you’ll be gaining muscle and strength, which will offset this.)

But this is the price you have to be willing to pay to make progress. Otherwise, you’ll stay in physique purgatory.

Make sense?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Amanda C.

 

 
 October 6, 2024 23:12

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy,

This content is incredible. I’ve been training for a couple of years now and not making as much progress as I’d like and I can see now that it’s likely due to not training hard enough during my bulking phase. I just finished a mini cut that I stopped very early on due to noticing I haven’t made much progress. At the end of this, I did a dexa scan which revealed that I’m 33% body fat. I’d like to go into a slow/controlled bulk, but would you recommend that I get my body fat percentage lower before starting? About me:

Female

36 yo

5’6”

131lbs

Sedentary plus 4 days/week lifting

10k steps/day 

Thanks in advance!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 October 7, 2024 07:47

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Amanda C.
 

 

 
Hi Amanda, thank you. Glad you’ve been finding my content helpful!

You bulked, you felt fat. You then cut but stopped because you felt you hadn’t gained enough muscle when bulking to be happy when you leaned out. You’re now considering bulking.

You can see how this could potentially go in cycles unless you change something, right? Exceptionally common. I call it physique purgatory.

Not training hard enough may have been a problem, and you may get a better result from your bulk. But ask yourself this: could you gain 8 lbs of fat and 15 lbs overall over the course of the next eight months and not want to quit before because you feel too fat? If not, get leaner first.

(And don’t trust that DEXA scan.)

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Zugmaschine

 

 
 October 8, 2023 00:06

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy.

Thanks for that much free information.

Iam 58 years, 180cm and 100kg with aroubd 30% Bodyfat.

Since 15 month i go 4 times per week in the gym and i have also build some muscle.

Would you say i can build muscle with maintenance calories or a smal surplus of 100-200 kcal?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 October 9, 2023 08:48

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Zugmaschine
 

 

 
Hi Zugmaschine,

Yes, though you’ll probably be able to keep building while in a calorie deficit, and that way, you’ll kill two birds with one stone (and catch arguably the more important bird).

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Arnau

 

 
 September 20, 2023 01:49

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hello Andy. 

I appreciate all your content. After my second cut phase and 3 weeks of maintenance to find my maintenance calories I started bulking this week.

I am a smoker and after a while thinking about it, I have decided to quit smoking next Monday.

I read a bit about it and it seems tobacco increses methabolism and after quitting my body will be consuming less calories so I assume I should decrease my intake daily calories but not sure to what extent.

Do you have any clues about how much should I reduce? I don’t want to be gaining a lot of extra weight which would maily turn into fat (due to relaxed bulk).

Thanks in advance.

Arnau

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 George

 

 
 December 31, 2022 07:34

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hello Andy,

wanted to ask if you had read the book "Glucose revolution" and if you think its guidelines are OK to be followed by someone who wants to have a ripped body 

The author recommends to eat in this exact order: fiber first, then protein and fats, after that carbs, and only eventually, sugars.

Do you think that eating in this way might be counterproductive (in terms of how the body will use the macros it receives with the food) or you don't see any issue? Or maybe you also suggest to follow this order?

Best regards

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 December 31, 2022 16:16

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 George
 

 

 
1. I haven't, but with a title like that, I don't need to. It'll be a book spreading fear of carbohydrate intake, particularly sugar, using the carbohydrate-insulin model of obesity as justification. This theorizes that diets high in carbohydrates are particularly fattening due to their propensity to elevate insulin secretion. This is over-simplistic. You can ignore what you have read.

2. Eating in that order wouldn't be counterproductive, but it's unnecessary.

3. It is a good idea to prioritize lean meats, fruits, vegetables, dairy, nuts, and legumes (not an exhaustive list). It is not necessary to avoid sugar, but if you are trying to sustain a calorie deficit, it is best to minimize very highly processed foods, many of which will have a high sugar content (and a high-fat content), and not be very filling. When bulking, you still want to prioritize those foods I said, but if/when you struggle to eat enough to continue to gain weight, don't be afraid to eat more of those highly palatable foods.

Download my nutrition setup guide if you haven't already and read that. It'll give you all you need. The box to download it is at the end of the article.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 George

 

 
 January 1, 2023 22:14

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thank you very much for the answer Andy.

Just so you know, by reading that book I didn't get the impression that I should avoid/limit carbs or sugars, just that (for the insulinic response you already mentioned) it should be better to eat them after fibers, proteins, and fats…

(there're no limits on their quantity, it's just a matter of changing the order in which someone eats what s/he already does)

Also, I'm not that much interested in the fat loss aspect here, I'm trying to follow such order mainly for all the other healthy reasons that apparently are related with eating carbs/sugars at the end of the meal

Thank you again, appreciate you continuous contributions!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 January 2, 2023 14:45

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 George
 

 

 
Gotcha. Well, that's nonsense too. Now, this sucks because you wasted your time reading a book filled with bullshit, but it's liberating because you don't have to eat food in any particular order.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 George

 

 
 January 4, 2023 05:51

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
haha, ok, thank you Andy !!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 January 4, 2023 15:56

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 George
 

 

 
Most welcome.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Thomas

 

 
 October 6, 2022 23:12

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy,

Currently in my first 5 weeks of a bulk. Confused about some scale changes since starting.

Average weekly weights:

W1: 149.2

W2: 150.3

W3: 152

W4: 152

W5: 153.6

5’9 male, eating 2500 cals (as rec. by macro calculator), 7-8.5 hours sleep nightly, 0.7-0.9 g/lb protein, mod-high life stress. Following intermediate bodybuilding routine.

Not much scale movement in first 2 weeks, then suddenly a big “bump” in week 3. Is this glycogen, gut content, etc.? Wondering from which week onwards I should be tracking my monthly gain? Do you recommend keeping calories/macros the same for another 5 weeks?

Thank you,

Thomas

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 October 7, 2022 08:59

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Thomas
 

 

 
Hi Thomas, there’s nothing unusual about your numbers. The scale weight will fluctuate, even if you take weekly averages, and progress will not be linear from week to week. You need to wait longer until the trend is clear. Here’s my decision framework for adjusting calories and macros when bulking.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Thomas

 

 
 October 7, 2022 11:15

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thanks for the reply.

So, if I’m shooting for the 1% monthly weight gain goal for intermediate bulking, at what point it is appropriate to interprete the data? 

From week 1 to week 5 I gained 4 pounds. If my goal is a 1% BW gain per month, do I need another month of data to properly interpret? Hope I’m being clear enough.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 October 10, 2022 06:49

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Thomas
 

 

 
Until the trend is clear. You’ll need a minimum of four weeks for that.

You’re at that point. If you feel confident in the trend, interpret. If not, wait.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Alex

 

 
 October 2, 2022 00:58

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy,

I get the changes in the first week of a bulk/cut would be higher due to glycogen, gut content and water, but would this still be the case for someone going from maintenance to a bulk?

I assume going from maintenance to a cut would be the same as going from a bulk to a cut, but I’m not sure if you’d get that large change in weight when going from maintenance to a bulk.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 October 3, 2022 07:01

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Alex
 

 

 
Yes, but less. — The calorie bump is lower, so the weight bump will be lower.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Erik Hans

 

 
 September 14, 2022 02:11

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hey Andy! If someone only ate at maintenance and in a calorie deficit for years but worked his way up to benching 38 kg dumbbells for six reps and chin-ups with bodyweight + 20 kg for 6 reps without gaining much muscle, could he still get ‘beginners muscle gains’ if he ate in a calorie surplus?

Kind regards,

Erik

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 September 14, 2022 08:40

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Erik Hans
 

 

 
Possibly yes, probably not.

Muscle is the engine that drives the potential to be strong. More muscle doesn’t necessarily mean more strength, but there is a limit to how strong we can be without more muscle gain. So, the muscle gain (and fat loss) may have already happened, but it was over too slow of a time scale to truly appreciate it.

I would set your weight gain target as an intermediate trainee would.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 George

 

 
 August 11, 2022 18:50

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy – I’m a 27 Yo male, 84kg’s and 5’10

I’ve repeatedly been trying to lose weight on 1400 kcalories. My monthly average has been 1567 since March of this year and my weight has stayed relatively constant only losing 2kg, but my strength has increased. I’m tracking everything down to my cod liver oil – my macro average over the same period is P 127g, C 168g, F 47g.

I estimate my current BF % in the range of 20 – 25%. I’m loathe to cut calories further to reduce my body fat but am also terrified of the increased fat gain associated with bulking at higher calories. I was wondering if you had any advice as to which direction I’d be best off moving in? Thank you!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 August 12, 2022 06:29

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 George
 

 

 
Hi George, one of these two articles has your answer:

• Should I Bulk vs Cut (or Recomp)? The Definitive Guide

• How To Adjust Macros As You Diet To Keep Progressing

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 George

 

 
 August 12, 2022 19:14

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thanks Andy, your articles have all been really useful.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 August 13, 2022 11:00

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 George
 

 

 
Most welcome, George!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 John

 

 
 July 31, 2022 01:37

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy 

I feel there needs to be greater clarity on defining the training age’ of a lifter or perhaps a new way of categorising % of weight gain per week/month

For eg. if someone that has been training for circa 7 years with attempting to progressively overload and training efficiently but their nutrition setup hasn’t been optimal for a few years. Where would they fall given the later isn’t ‘training’ but nutrition inadequacy, resulting in potential progression but not as much had their nutrition been more optimal..

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 August 1, 2022 09:22

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 John
 

 

 
Yes, you’re quite right, John. I’m all ears if you can think of a way to re-write things to make it clearer.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 John

 

 
 May 6, 2022 21:31

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy, thank your for this thorough article! In the example of the 160 novice lifter on a controlled bulk, he eats less on rest days. Is this recommended when working out 3 days a week?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 May 7, 2022 08:03

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 John
 

 

 
Hi John, it doesn’t really make a difference either way. I have more about calorie and carb cycling here: A Nutrient Timing Guide To Maximize Fat Loss and Muscle Growth

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Sivakumar L

 

 
 February 15, 2022 18:42

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy,

I am a Novice Body builder.

At 10% bodyfat, I started bulking @ weight 57.207 kgs after 1st week end. After 8 weeks my weight was 58.828 kgs. Solid as planned. But suddenly next day, I was shocked to see my weight @ 58.2 kgs. I consumed same carbs as usual. My NEAT is also same as usual. What may be the reason ??

Thanks

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 February 18, 2022 08:21

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Sivakumar L
 

 

 
Fat and muscle mass don’t change suddenly. So this was some combination of a change in water, glycogen, or gut content.

You’ll see in my Progress Tracking Guide that I recommend people weigh each day and then average it over the course of the week. If you do that you’ll get used to these fluctuations. If you don’t, your data will be useless.

Now you may be wondering, “Oh, Andy saw this comment but didn’t answer my other one a few weeks ago. Why?”

I deleted it. I’ve become frustrated and fed up with answering you. You’ve been asking questions since May last year but it’s become very clear that you haven’t read the guides on the site that I’ve been linking you to. You’re a ship at sea without a sail and I’m not going to watch it smash on the rocks any longer. Read the site. Read the other comments. It has what you need. Best of luck.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Sim

 

 
 December 13, 2021 23:58

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
1) Here’s the scale weight data for our 160 lb novice trainee, aiming to gain 2.4 lbs per month, since the calorie and macro change:

160 » 162 lbs

162.4 lbs

162.9 lbs

163.2 lbs

163.4 lbs

Let’s say the change from the end of week 1 to the end of week 5 is within the monthly target weight and no macro adjustments were made. From there I wait another 5 weeks and then I calculate the change from the end of week 5 to end of week 9. Am I correct?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 December 14, 2021 08:18

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Sim
 

 

 
Hi Sim, I recommend assessing things every two weeks, looking back on all recent data, trying to spot the rate of weight change. Don’t just look at the two data points four weeks apart as there may be fluctuations. Here’s my guide to tracking progress.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Sim

 

 
 December 15, 2021 23:28

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 

70 » 71 (first week’s bump ignored) 

71.3 

71.2 

71.4 

71.3 

This is my data for 5 weeks of weekly average. There are fluctuations between each weekly average. Drawing a trend line shows that I’m gaining weight because the trend is going up but how do I calculate how much weight I gained in a month? Wasn’t I supposed to take 71.3 minus 71 to get 0.3kg which is how much I gained per month?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 December 16, 2021 12:55

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Sim
 

 

 
Hi Sim, thanks for the follow-up. 

“Wasn’t I supposed to take 71.3 minus 71 to get 0.3kg which is how much I gained per month?”

Technically, this is how much weight you gained in a 4-week period, yes. But weight captures not just muscle and fat mass changes, but also water, glycogen, and gut content.

The reason I said to look for a trend line is that any given week may be an anomaly that doesn’t fit the rest of the pattern, precisely because of these non-fat/muscle fluctuations.

If you ignore the first week, what do you see? Nothing, right? I recommend making an increase to get yourself on track.

My book, The Diet Adjustments Manual, has all of this kind of thing covered and may be of interest.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Tommy Sakaoka

 

 
 November 26, 2021 23:15

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Is it realistic to maintain around 10% BF year around without losing muscle mass ?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 November 27, 2021 09:32

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Tommy Sakaoka
 

 

 
Hi Tommy, see the “What is the maximum level of leanness that I can reasonably expect to maintain?” section at the end of this article: How to Find Maintenance Calories After Dieting

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Tim

 

 
 September 17, 2021 00:09

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy, I feel like I remember you writing somewhere what the upper limit of my average weekly waist measurement increase should be when doing a controlled bulk. What would that be? I started a controlled bulking phase 5 weeks ago and, even when not accounting for the initial increase in the first week, I’m surprised by how much my waist measurements are going up relative to a couple of years of following your instructions and what I believed my TDEE from tracking over that time. My weight is also going up quicker (4.4 lbs since the end of week one, which is 2.6 lbs over my goal of 1.6 lbs for the month) than I’d expect but I want to compare that to my waist tracking.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 September 17, 2021 09:11

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Tim
 

 

 
Hi Tim, the bump in measurements you’re experiencing right now is from the increase in gut content and water, due to the higher carb/fiber intake, and food intake in general. It’s normal.

I don’t remember what my exact guideline was, but I ditched it because it got people to focus on the wrong thing.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Richard

 

 
 September 15, 2021 10:54

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
1. How often do you suggest I take progress pictures while bulking

2. Do I weigh myself the day before I start the bulk to see my initial weight

3. How much cardio should I do while bulking

I appreciate the help man

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 September 15, 2021 17:59

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Richard
 

 

 
Hi Richard, 

1/2. Check out my progress tracking guide.

3. As little as you need to be cardiovascularly fit enough to perform well and recover from your training (this relates mostly to lower-body work, and the necessity increases over time), and as much as you wish, as long as it doesn’t interfere with recovery.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Josh

 

 
 September 10, 2021 08:15

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hey, I am planning on a bulk then cut afterwards because I am skinny fat. How long do you recommend I bulk for before switching to cutting? and should I eat at maintenance between the bulk and cut phases or just dive straight into the cut. If so, how long for? Thanks

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 September 10, 2021 09:05

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Josh
 

 

 
Hi Josh. 5-6 months minimum. Yes, two weeks. You don’t have to, but it’ll be less of a shock to the system if you make the decrease in two steps (maintenance then the cut). This is all covered here: The Diet Adjustments Manual, 3rd Edition

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Josh

 

 
 September 10, 2021 12:56

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Ok great, makes sense 

I’ve got one more question about the macros during a bulk/cut

I’m a teenager and only 100lbs and it’s suggested during a bulk to consume 0.8-1g per lbs of bodyweight which means about 100g protein a day for me. However, because the protein is only 100g, I gotta eat a lot of carbs to reach my calorie intake (around 50% of calories) because the protein is only 20% of my calories. I also consume 30% of calories from fats. Should I up my protein intake or is it enough even though I’m really light and the ratio is 50:20:30 CPF? (a lot of carbs which I’m fine with if it’s not bad)

How much protein do you suggest during a cut for me?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 September 13, 2021 10:42

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Josh
 

 

 
As a teenager and a fairly young one I’m guessing based on your weight, rather than trying to guess your calorie needs, it’s best to just train hard, sleep well, and eat to your hunger. Let puberty run its magic.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Josh

 

 
 September 13, 2021 11:21

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Oh okay

What age do you suggest I start counting calories/macros and is it ok for me to just eat to hunger and not count anything because I’m skinny fat and want to bulk and cut.

Thank you so much man

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 September 14, 2021 09:41

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Josh
 

 

 
When you stop growing like a weed naturally through puberty.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Aaron Busby

 

 
 August 14, 2021 07:08

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy your article has been really helpful and appreciate your information

I’m 19yr M 5’6” 14-17%bf weight training properly for about 2 years and currently 119lbs (starting from 112lbs) at the 3 month mark of a 6 month bulk (aiming to be at approx 125lbs by the end of the 6 months) and have been gaining approx 0.3-0.5lbs a week (1-1.5%pm).

Obviously my body weight is on the low side so I was wondering what approach you would recommend towards bulking and cutting duration- after I’ve reached the end of the 6 months would you recommend extending the bulk duration or starting a cut phase (wether that be a short mini cut or a traditional 8-12 week cut)

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Aaron Busby

 

 
 December 3, 2021 02:32

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Aaron Busby
 

 

 
Update*

I’m now at 122lbs (20yr) and have decided to continue bulking, I’m still able to progress load on a month to month basis and reps on most weeks, would a 1%bw per month increase (1.2lbs) still be recommended or maybe a greater % and for what duration

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 December 3, 2021 13:48

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Aaron Busby
 

 

 
Hi Aaron, 1.2 lbs is going to be hard to measure and therefore manage. I’d consider a target of 1.5–2 lbs per month.

Sorry if I missed your question a few months ago.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Aaron Busby

 

 
 December 3, 2021 16:44

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thank you Andy I appreciate the response, what duration would you recommend for the 1.5-2 lbs a month

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 December 5, 2021 10:31

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Aaron Busby
 

 

 
5 months at the very minimum. More on this in the article. I’ve also talked about it in my “Should I Bulk vs Cut (or Recomp)?” guide.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Aaron Busby

 

 
 December 5, 2021 18:57

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Ah okay that’s great (had planned on doing 6 months at a minimum anyway), thanks for sharing the article I’ll give it a read

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 December 6, 2021 04:55

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Aaron Busby
 

 

 
Most welcome!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Aaron

 

 
 January 19, 2022 00:57

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Hi Andy I think I may have over shot my calorie requirement since gaining 2.5lbs this month instead of 2lbs, to adjust for the next month would an adjustment of -75cals to my daily intake resolve this?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 January 19, 2022 15:46

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Aaron
 

 

 
Hi Aaron, you’ll see the math and example calculations in the “Controlled Bulk Example Adjustments” section.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Aaron Busby

 

 
 January 19, 2022 17:53

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thank you for the reply, I had previously looked at that section but wasn’t sure if my maths was correct as the adjustments shown were for being 1lb under goal leading to an increase of +150 rather than 0.5lbs over which I assumed would be a reduction of -75 (150*0.5)

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Thomas

 

 
 July 22, 2021 16:17

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hey Andy first off thank you so much for the information it’s helped loads. 

When recording weight to track over 5 weeks to figure out if weight gain is on target you say end of week, do you mean the average of the week or just the weigh in at the last day of the week?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 July 23, 2021 10:21

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Thomas
 

 

 
Hi Thomas, weigh yourself every day. Note the average of that at the end of the week. Compare weekly averages.

Thank you for asking. More on this here: How To Track Body Measurements and Weight for Physique Progress

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Wesam

 

 
 July 15, 2021 01:55

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hi Andy, I have a note and a question. You say that the reason you are not progressing is because you are not eating enough calories, isn’t it supposed that if you exercise correctly, you will feel hungry to build muscle?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 July 15, 2021 08:31

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Wesam
 

 

 
Hi Wesam, appetite often increases when we train, but not in all cases and not forever. So, if you find yourself not progressing and not gaining weight, you need to eat more.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 Load Rest of Comments 
 

 
 

 × 

 
 Scroll to Top
 

Insert