Title: Guide To Program Building For Bodybuilding and Powerlifting
URL: https://rippedbody.com/how-to-build-training-programs/
Description: Step-by-step guide to building training programs from the 3rd edition of our bestselling book, The Muscle and Strength Pyramid: Training.

===CONTENT===

Guide To Program Building For Bodybuilding and Powerlifting Skip to content No-nonsense Nutrition and Training Guides Now reading Guide To Program Building For Bodybuilding and Powerlifting Main Menu FREE GUIDES Start Here Nutrition Guides Training Guides Body-fat Pictures Recommended Resources CALCULATORS Calorie and Macro Calculator Target Weight Calculator Body Fat Calculator BOOKS PODCAST YOUTUBE RESULTS Client Results Case Studies COACHING Now reading Guide To Program Building For Bodybuilding and Powerlifting Main Menu FREE GUIDES Start Here Nutrition Guides Training Guides Body-fat Pictures Recommended Resources CALCULATORS Calorie and Macro Calculator Target Weight Calculator Body Fat Calculator BOOKS PODCAST YOUTUBE RESULTS Client Results Case Studies COACHING Guide To Program Building For Bodybuilding and Powerlifting Ripped Body Training Guides , The Muscle and Strength Pyramid Books, Sample Chapters and Programs , Training Programs • by Eric Helms, Andy Morgan and Andrea Valdez Updated: 28th December, 2025 This is a sample chapter from the 3rd edition of our bestselling book: The Muscle and Strength Pyramid: Training . It links the main points from each chapter and is a step-by-step guide to building a training program for bodybuilding or powerlifting. We’ll take you through each level of The Training Pyramid, highlighting the main points and the subsequent decisions you’ll need to make at each level as they relate to building a program. CONTENTS : (Click to jump to the corresponding section.) Step 1: Adherence Step 2: Volume, Intensity, and Frequency Step 3: Progression Step 4: Exercise Selection Steps 5 and 6: Rest Periods and Tempo Warming Up Dual Athletes To see these programming principles brought to life, you can view our sample programs here . Step 1: Adherence Plan your workout frequency with adherence in mind. The main takeaway of Level 1 is selecting how many days per week you train. Choose a realistic number of training days that would not stress your life or schedule. This value can be anywhere from two or more days per week. Decide whether fewer, longer sessions or more frequent, shorter sessions suit you better. Your training experience interacts with this decision, as at a certain point, it is challenging for most people to progress (although maintenance is certainly feasible) without training at least three times per week. For advanced lifters, a two-day schedule is rarely practical as the loads and volumes required make each workout a gruelling marathon. Once you’ve set your weekly training schedule, you can choose from several possible setups (often referred to as “splits”). Frequency Splits for Powerlifting The Strength Frequency Matrix for Choosing Splits table shows example training splits for powerlifting-focused strength work. Remember: any movement that trains the same muscles as a main lift, but is not the main lift itself, adds 0.5 to your weekly frequency for that lift. For example, a squat session also contributes 0.5 to your weekly deadlift frequency, and vice versa. As you might recall, ideally, you train each lift with a frequency of at least twice per week. However, if you can only train twice per week, this requires two days where you perform all three main lifts (if you are following a powerlifting program), which may not be feasible for everyone. Thus, we provide examples of weekly lift frequencies in the 1.5–2x per week range as well. Anecdotally, most powerlifters find squats create less next-day discomfort and soreness than deadlifts, so our examples lean toward higher squat frequency. If you find the opposite is true for you, feel free to reverse this emphasis. Find your available training days in the left column. The rows to the right show split options, with weekly main-lift frequencies (not counting secondary lifts ) listed at the top. Remember: a secondary lift that trains the same muscle groups will add 0.5 to your weekly frequency for that main lift. Find your available training days in the left column. The rows to the right show split options, with weekly main-lift frequencies (not counting secondary lifts ) listed at the top. Remember: a secondary lift that trains the same muscle groups will add 0.5 to your weekly frequency for that main lift. TABLE 7.1. STRENGTH FREQUENCY MATRIX FOR CHOOSING SPLITS Days Per Week Main Lift Frequency Per Week 1.5–2 2 2–3 3-4 4-5 6 2 S/B, B/D S/B/D, S/B/D NA NA NA NA 3 S/B, B, D NA S/B, B/D, S/B S/B/D, B, S/B/D, B NA NA 4 S, B, D, B S/D, B, D/S, B S/B, B, D, S/B S/B, B/D, S/B, B/D S/B/D, B/S, S/B/D, B/D NA 5 S, B, D, B, Secondaries S/D, B, D/S, B,Secondaries S/B, B, D, S/B, Secondaries S/B, B/D, S/B, B/D, Secondaries S/B, B/D, S/B, B/D, S/B NA 6 S, B, D, B, Secondaries, Secondaries S/D, B, D/S, B, Secondaries, Secondaries S, B, D, B, S, B S, B, D, B, S/B, B/D S/B/D, B, D, S/B, B/D, S/B S/B/D, S/B, B/D, S/B/D, S/B, B/D S = Squat B = Bench D = Deadlift NA = Not applicable “/” indicates performed in the same session, commas separate days. Frequency Splits for Bodybuilding For hypertrophy training, you have a lot more room for flexibility in your split. Remember that, unlike strength, muscle group frequency has a very small impact on your outcomes. Therefore, you can see the matrix displays a non-exhaustive list of approaches you can use. The main goal when designing your split is to avoid sessions becoming logistically impractical, overly fatiguing, demotivating, or exceeding roughly 11 sets per muscle group per session . When you view the Sample Programs spreadsheet, you’ll see that we’ve used an arrangement that differs from most traditional bodybuilding setups. Specifically, we alternate between primarily: Chest & Back with Quads & Calves Arms & Middle/Rear Delts with Glutes & Hamstrings In prior editions of The Pyramids, we provided traditional sample programs, such as Upper/Lower , Full Body , and Body Part splits. These are so commonplace now that we believe you should have no issue translating the guidance in this book into those types of splits. Thus, we aim to provide you with even more examples of how to divide up your volume in a week; we are not implying that those types of splits are inferior by omitting them in our Sample Programs spreadsheet. In addition, the frequency matrix will help you learn all the options you can use to find the best balance between stimulus and recovery. In our experience, especially when trying to achieve higher volume approaches, most traditional approaches (body part splits, lower/push/pull) are not ideal for optimizing the balance between recovery and stimulus, so being more creative is important as you advance. The Hypertrophy Frequency Matrix for Choosing Splits table will help you explore both traditional and non-traditional options. Start by finding the number of days you can train in the left column, then review the potential split options in the right column. The top row lists the weekly training frequency for each muscle group, which includes fractional frequency from indirect work. If you aren’t sure of what any of the session types refer to, see the descriptions below the matrix. Even when using classical bodybuilding splits, where you only train each muscle group once per week, because of indirect work producing fractional sets (i.e., bench press indirectly trains the triceps, adding 0.5 to triceps weekly frequency), few training splits provide a true weekly muscle group frequency of only one. TABLE 7.2. HYPERTROPHY FREQUENCY MATRIX FOR CHOOSING SPLITS Days Per Week Muscle Group Frequency Per Week 1-2 2 3 4 5 6 2 Upper, Lower or Full Push, Full Pull Full Body, Full Body NA NA NA NA 3 Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull Lower, Upper, Full Body or Full Push, Full Pull, Full Body Full Body, Full Body, Full Body NA NA NA 4 Chest & Tris, Back & Bis, Shoulders, Lower Lower, Upper, Lower, Upper or Full Push, Full Pull, Full Push, Full Pull Upper, Lower, Full Body, Full Body or Full Push, Full Pull, Full Body, Full Body Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body NA NA 5 Chest, Back, Lower, Shoulders, Arms Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull, Lower, Upper or Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull, Full Push, Full Pull Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull, Full, Full Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Upper, Lower or Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Push, Full Pull Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body NA 6 Chest, Back, Quads & Calves, Shoulders, Arms, Glutes & Hams Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull, Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull Lower, Upper, Lower, Upper, Lower, Upper or Full Push, Full Pull, Full Push, Full Pull, Full Push, Full Pull Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Upper, Lower or Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Push, Full Pull Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body, Full Body NA = Not applicable Session Type Descriptions for the Hypertrophy Frequency Matrix Muscle Group Sessions Train one or two muscle groups (e.g., chest; chest and triceps; back; back and biceps; quads and calves; shoulders, etc.), allowing high muscle-group volume per session without excessively long workouts. These sessions require a longer recovery time for the trained muscles, resulting in a lower weekly frequency. Best suited for low to moderate weekly muscle group volumes (~4–12 sets). Less effective for higher weekly volumes unless combined with other session types (e.g., a 4-day upper/lower split plus 1–2 muscle group sessions for specialization). Upper Push or Pull Sessions Used in the popular “Legs/Push/Pull” split, these train all upper-body pushing muscles (chest, triceps, anterior delts) or pulling muscles (back, biceps, rear delts). Choose one day to train middle delts. This structure allows reasonably high volume without excessively long sessions. Suitable for low to moderate weekly volumes when performed once per week, but can also support moderate to high weekly volumes (~12–24 sets) if performed multiple times per week (e.g., a 6-day repeated legs/push/pull split) or combined with other session types (Full Body, Upper, Lower, Full Push, Full Pull). Upper or Lower Sessions Train the entire upper or lower body together. Allows moderate muscle-group volume without overly long sessions. Works well for low to moderate volumes when performed once per week, and moderate to moderately high volumes (~12–18 sets) when performed twice per week (e.g., a 4-day Upper/Lower split). Higher volumes are possible if alternating six days per week or combining with other session types (e.g., Full Body, Full Push, or Full Pull). Note: Lower body sessions are disproportionately challenging due to the loads and number of muscle groups trained. Non-traditional approaches may be better for those seeking very high lower-body volumes. Full Body Sessions Train the entire body to some degree in each session. A strict “full body” approach (training all muscle groups in every session) limits per-session muscle-group volume unless workouts become very long. Works well for low to moderate weekly volumes when used 2–3 times per week, and can support moderate to moderately high volumes (~12–18 sets) when used 3+ times per week or combined with other session types. Higher volumes are possible at 5+ sessions per week with careful programming. Because per-session muscle-group volume is low per session, training muscle groups on consecutive days can occur without compromising recovery, provided RIR, muscle length, and exercise selection are managed to avoid excessive overlap and fatigue. Full Push or Pull Sessions Combine an upper push or pull session with lower-body work: push days include quads and calves; pull days include glutes and hamstrings. Like the non-traditional approach in the sample programs, this is a non-strict interpretation of “full body.” Because you aren’t attempting to perform an entire leg day, these sessions allow a higher muscle group volume per week without any single session becoming too long and therefore too physiologically or psychologically demanding. Alternating these sessions is a good alternative to the sample programs for those who wish to train on consecutive days, especially if you experience a negative impact of prior-day arm training on chest or back performance, or vice versa. Supports a wide range of weekly volumes: Low if done twice per week with shorter sessions. Moderately low to moderately high if done 3–4 times per week. Very high if alternated 5+ times per week with moderate session lengths. Key Programming Note With the same total weekly volume, your chosen split determines how much work each muscle group gets per session and, therefore, session length. Six “full body” days → fewer exercises per muscle group, fewer sets per exercise, shorter sessions. Two “full body” days → more exercises per muscle group, more sets per exercise, longer sessions. In the hypertrophy sample programs, higher weekly volumes are paired with higher frequencies, and vice versa. In strength training, the frequency matrix is organized around how often you train the: Bench press . Squats and deadlifts combined (due to overlap in stimulus and stress). Very high or very low frequencies can be problematic. Overloaded sessions can cause performance drop-off, while high frequencies may cause joint or connective tissue stress regardless of total volume. For ~90% of lifters, train 3–5 days per week with a muscle/movement frequency of 2–4 times per week, as this typically strikes the best balance between stimulus and recovery. Pencil in the split you’ve chosen for now, because in step two, we’ll discuss some other potential considerations that might impact your decision. Step 2: Volume, Intensity, Frequency Set appropriate Volume, Intensity, Frequency for your workouts . As a reminder, these are the broad starting guidelines appropriate for most people: TABLE 7.3. VOLUME • INTENSITY • FREQUENCY SUMMARY OF STARTING RECOMMENDATIONS Hypertrophy Strength Volume 1 Minimum ED 2 4 sets/muscle/wk, increases w/training status. 1 set/lift/wk, increases w/training status. Maximum ED 3 ~30 sets/muscle/wk ~5 sets/lift/wk (short-term) Practical ED 4 10–20 sets/muscle wk, Higher volume with specialization. 3–5 sets/lift/wk (short-term), 5–10 sets/muscle/wk (long-term). Intensity 5 Load ~4–30 RM (~30-90% 1RM) 1–8 RM (~80+% 1RM) RIR 4–0 RIR and failure per load/rep combination. ~7–0 RIR per load/rep combination. 4–6 reps/set: 4-0 RIR Load, not RIR, dictates strength. RIR is a function of load. Higher loads allow fewer reps and are inherently closer to failure. 6–8 reps/set: 3 RIR to failure 8–12 reps/set: 2 RIR to failure >12 reps/set: 1 RIR to failure Frequency 6 ≥1x/muscle/wk based on volume. If performing >11 weekly sets per muscle group, increase frequency so no session exceeds 11 fractional sets per muscle group. 2–6x/lift/wk based on volume. Higher frequency provides some benefit. Spread sets over as many days as possible with 1–2 direct sets per main lift per session. 1 As fractional sets. Hypertrophy: sets count as full sets for primary muscles, half for secondary. Strength: tested lift sets count as full sets, other lifts training primary or secondary muscles as half. 2 Lowest volume to produce measurable gains in 2–3 months. For hypertrophy in trained lifters, requires low RIR (near or to failure). For strength in trained lifters, requires high specificity (high load and on specific lift). Use if ideal training can’t occur. Produces progress in novice-intermediate, maintenance in intermediate-advanced. 3 Volume threshold when diminished returns reach a plateau. 4 Appropriate range for real-world, long-term training. Individual differences and circumstances dictate where to fall in these ranges. Higher volumes closer to maximum ED only advised for advanced lifters via specialization cycles. Long-term strength gains require hypertrophy; thus, some hypertrophy volume in high efficiency range recommended. 5 High load effective for hypertrophy at high RIR but sets must be ≥4 reps. RIR underestimation more likely at low loads. 6 High volume best distributed with high frequency for hypertrophy, higher frequency strength practice beneficial. Determining Volume You’ve already penciled in your frequency in Step 1. Next, it’s time to choose an appropriate volume. Remember, “optimal” depends on your circumstances and goals: For hypertrophy with minimal time , optimal might mean the lowest volume that still produces good returns. For a competitive bodybuilder , optimal might mean maximum achievable volume for the highest possible rate of muscle gain. Your training history also matters. If you have detailed logs showing your rates of progress at different volumes, use them to guide your choice. If not, start tracking now and adjust in future cycles. For now, consider your time availability and perspective on “optimal” in your decision. TABLE 7.4. HYPERTROPHY VOLUME TIERS BY TIME COMMITMENT, AVERAGE STIMULUS PER SET, AND TOTAL STIMULUS Weekly Sets per Muscle Time Commitment Average Stimulus Per Set Total Stimulus 4–8 Minimal (~1-2.5 hours) Highest Lowest (~25-45% of highest tier) 9–12 Low (~3-4.5 hours) High Modest (~45-60% of highest tier) 13–16 Medium (~5-6.5 hours) Medium Medium (~60-70% of highest tier) 17–20 High (~7-8.5 hours) Low High (~70-85% of highest tier) 21–30 Very High (~9+ hours) Lowest Highest (~85-100% if sustainable) 2 1 Often best accomplished via specialization cycles, with other muscle groups in a lower volume tier. 2 If RIR increases, technical execution degrades, effective exercises are dropped, or frequent deloads occur (causing lower net volume), overall stimulus may not be the highest. Determining Frequency The higher your weekly volume , the more sense it makes to spread it over more sessions . This: Prevents excessively long, fatiguing sessions. Maintains session quality. Increases skill practice for strength goals. As a reminder from Level 2, our frequency per lift or per muscle group recommendations are inextricably linked to weekly volume, session volume, and the number of weekly sessions performed. TABLE 7.5. FREQUENCY RECOMMENDATIONS Goal Frequency Guideline Hypertrophy ≥1x/week per muscle group, based on volume. If you exceed ~11 fractional sets for a muscle in a session, increase frequency to distribute volume better. Strength 2–6x/week per lift, depending on volume. Spread sets across as many sessions as possible, with 1–2 direct sets per lift per session. High volume is best distributed with higher frequency for hypertrophy, and increased frequency offers benefits for strength by enhancing skill practice and movement quality. TABLE 7.6. FREQUENCY RECOMMENDATIONS BY VOLUME Weekly Fractional Sets Per Muscle Weekly Frequency Per Muscle 4–10 1–2 11–20 2–3 21–30 3+ If your volume doesn’t match well with your Step 1 split, either: Adjust your total volume. Adjust your split choice. Hypertrophy Volume Distribution Example With your volume level and frequency chosen, if your goal is hypertrophy, you will spread that volume for each muscle group across the week. Once again, just pencil this in to get an idea of how your week is shaping up. For example, let’s say you are doing 13–15 sets per muscle group with a 4-day, two times per week muscle group frequency, doing a ‘Lower, Upper Push, Upper Pull, Full Body’ split. Spreading things out, you’d probably do 4–6 sets per muscle group on your Full Body day, leaving 9–11 sets per muscle group for your Legs, Push, and Pull days. Goal: 13–15 sets per muscle group per week. Split: Lower / Upper Push / Upper Pull / Full Body. Full Body day: 4–6 sets per muscle group. Other days: 9–11 sets spread across targeted muscles. Strength Considerations If your goal is strength, you’d take the same approach as someone with a hypertrophy goal for your secondary work, but you also have the added complexity of determining your main lift frequency. The total volume for your main lifts will be lower than your secondary work, and you’d want to have a relatively high frequency to facilitate faster gains through frequent main lift practice. Thus, you have to think about how to spread out your main lift work to ensure recovery from your secondary lifts so that muscle soreness doesn’t impede strength. However you distribute your volume across your frequency selection, make sure you aren’t putting a lot of lower body secondary work prior to squat or deadlift main lift training, or a lot of upper body pressing secondary work prior to bench press main lift training (apply the same principles to other main lifts if you aren’t using the powerlifting main lifts). Secondary work : Same volume/frequency approach as hypertrophy. Main lifts : Lower total volume but higher frequency to improve skill. Avoid interference : Don’t schedule heavy secondary work for the same muscle group the day before main lift training (e.g., avoid lots of quad work before squats, lots of pressing before bench). Determining Intensity Once you’ve set your frequency and volume , the final step in Step 2 is to assign load and RPE/RIR . The chart shows appropriate repetition ranges and RPE/RIR values for hypertrophy (including hypertrophy work for strength goals) based on exercise and microcycle organization. Note that the chart provides a little more specificity than the main volume, intensity, frequency table, as it also considers exercise selection, such that while 0 RIR can be appropriate for low-rep high-load training for hypertrophy, it’s not ideal for most free weight compound lower body and upper body pressing exercises for safety, or even lower compound machine exercises for fatigue management. Likewise, while the 4–6 rep range can be used for hypertrophy, the resistance profile of certain exercises (most back training and many isolation exercises) makes it challenging to maintain form, and for those prone to joint discomfort or with prior injuries, it might be better reserved for compound exercises. TABLE 7.7. REP AND RPE/RIR RANGE COMBINATIONS FOR HYPERTROPHY BY EXERCISE TYPE Exercise Rep Range RPE/RIR Range Lower Free Weight Compound (squat, deadlift, RDL, etc.) 4–8 6–8 RPE/4–2 RIR Lower Machine Compound (leg press, hack squat, etc.) or Upper Free Weight Pressing (OHP, bench, incline DB, etc.) 4–12 6–9 RPE/4–1 RIR Upper Machine Pressing (machine chest or shoulder press, etc.) or Pulling Compound (lat pulldown, BB row, cable row, etc.) 6–15 7–10/3–0 RIR and failure Isolation (curls, tricep pushdown, calf raise, leg extension, lateral raise, etc.) 8–20 8–10/2–0 RIR and failure For hypertrophy (and secondary work for strength), the higher the fatigue generated by the movement, the greater the technical demand, and the greater the safety risk. Therefore, it makes more sense to train further from failure and use a higher load to ensure the set retains its full stimulus. This avoids fatigue bleeding into the rest of a session, may reduce the risk of injury, and also ensures that the volume you perform is effective because, as discussed in previous chapters, it’s harder to accurately rate RPE on high-rep, fatiguing movements. Compound movements are generally a better vehicle for doing the portion of your volume that is lower rep and further from failure, and thus heavier. Likewise, isolation exercises and machines are better vehicles for the higher-rep, lower-load portion of your volume. For main lifts trained for strength, remember that load is the driving force for adaptation. Therefore, the set, repetition, load, and RPE/RIR combinations heavily depend on your goal with the movement on that day, in the specific phase of training. This means there is no “cheat sheet” as you might decide to do a single at a 5 RPE/5 RIR 16 weeks out from a meet to maintain skill while producing minimal fatigue, or you might do so days from the meet during your taper to maintain peak levels of strength while dissipating fatigue. Ultimately, repetition and RPE/RIR combinations for your main lifts will be dictated by specificity and proximity to when you want to peak strength, with load dictating RPE/RIR. For examples of how these manipulations might occur over time, see the example strength programs as they go from volume to load to peak phases. When you combine this information with Step 3, you can really start to see how your program unfolds. Step 3: Progression Choose your progression strategy. At this stage, your program begins to take its final shape. You’ll now decide how to assign reps and sets across weeks and phases . Your approach depends on your goal : hypertrophy or strength. Implementing Rep Range Variation and Specialisation Phases For hypertrophy, as you recall from Level 3, you simply need variation in your repetition ranges, a plan to accommodate potentially unwieldy high volumes if you’re advanced and trying to use them to offset the natural slowing in your rate of hypertrophy, and a system to ensure progression to keep pace with your adaptations, maintaining the effectiveness of each set. First Step → Decide how you’ll incorporate rep range variation . This variation can be applied: Within a single session (e.g., one lift in the 6–8 range, another in the 12–15 range). Between sessions (e.g., heavy day / light day). Between weeks (e.g., rotating rep targets across weeks in a block). Between training blocks (e.g., spending several weeks in moderate rep ranges before moving to higher or lower ranges). TABLE 7.8. HYPERTROPHY TRAINING STRUCTURES TO ACHIEVE REP RANGE VARIATION Within Session Variation Lower A: 4–8, 6–10, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges varying lift to lift. Upper A: 4–8, 6–10, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges varying lift to lift. Lower B: 4–8, 6–10, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges varying lift to lift. Upper B: 4–8, 6–10, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges varying lift to lift. Between-Session Variation Lower A: 4–6, 6–10, and 8–12 rep ranges on all lifts. Upper A: 4–6, 6–10, and 8–12 rep ranges on all lifts. Lower B: 8–12, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges on all lifts. Upper B: 8–12, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges on all lifts. Alternating Week Variation Week A: 4–6, 6–10, and 8–12 rep ranges on all days. Week B: 8–12, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges on all days. Week A: 4–6, 6–10, and 8–12 rep ranges on all days. Week B: 8–12, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges on all days. Alternating Mesocycle Variation Meso A: 4–6, 6–10, and 8–12 rep ranges all weeks. Meso B: 8–12, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges all weeks. Meso A: 4–6, 6–10, and 8–12 rep ranges all weeks. Meso B: 8–12, 10–15, 15–20 rep ranges all weeks. Additionally, if you are an advanced lifter, you might decide to include specialization cycles to accommodate higher, muscle group-specific volumes in phases to facilitate continued hypertrophy long term as your rate of progress slows. TABLE 7.9. MUSCLE GROUP SPECIALIZATION PHASE MESOCYCLES Balanced Phase Specialization Phase Balanced Phase Specialization Phase Balanced Phase 8–12 weeks, 10–20 sets/wk on all muscle groups. 8–12 weeks, 20–30 sets/wk on 1–2 muscle groups, 5–15 on remaining. 8–12 weeks, 10–20 sets/wk on all muscle groups. 8–12 weeks, 20–30 sets/wk on 1–2 muscle groups, 5–15 on remaining. 8–12 weeks, 10–20 sets/wk on all muscle groups. Implementing Autoregulated Double Progression and Phasic Approaches With your mid-term plan for repetition range variation established, and your optional long-term plan for muscle group specialization phases (if advanced) determined, the only thing that remains is remembering how to implement autoregulated double progression, which you’ll use for all exercises, which you can see in the Example Autoregulated Double Progression for an Intermediate Lifter table from Level 3. Refer to our article on Progression for a fuller explanation. TABLE 7.10. EXAMPLE AUTOREGULATED DOUBLE PROGRESSION FOR AN INTERMEDIATE LIFTER Here’s how an intermediate lifter’s progression may look for 3 sets of 10–15 reps at 0–2 RIR. Session Load Reps First Set RIR 1 40 lbs 12, 12, 11 2 2 40 lbs 13, 13, 12 2 3 40 lbs 14, 14, 12 2 4 40 lbs 15, 14, 14 1 5 40 lbs 15, 14, 14 2 6 45 lbs 11, 10, 9 2 For a strength program, there is a little more you need to manage, as you need to not leverage specificity while managing fatigue to peak strength in the short term, but also facilitate hypertrophy long term to maximize your strength potential. For this reason, we recommend a phasic approach , alternating volume and load phases, and implementing peak phases as needed when preparing to test or compete. For your secondary lifts, you’ll use autoregulated double progression just as you would for hypertrophy-focused training. However, the repetition range , RIR/RPE , and volume and frequency of your main lifts will be phase-dependent. The summary tables outline guidelines for structuring each phase of your strength program. TABLE 7.11. SUMMARY TABLE: THE VOLUME PHASE Goal Build muscle; maintain or build strength. Main lifts 1–3 singles/lift/week; progress from 5 to 8 RPE (5 to 2 RIR). Secondary lifts 10–20 sets/week per main lift muscle group; mostly in the 6–20 rep range at 0–3 RIR; autoregulated double progression, primarily non-specific, low-demand exercises. Length 6–12 weeks per timeline. TABLE 7.12. SUMMARY TABLE: THE LOAD PHASE Goal Build strength, maintain/build muscle. Main lifts 2–4 singles/lift/week; progress from 6 to 9 RPE (4 to 1 RIR). 2 back-off sets/single at 5–8 RPE (5–2 RIR); progress from 5 to 3 reps (~80–85% 1RM). Use variations if needed. Secondary lifts 5–10 sets/week/main lift muscle group, mostly 6–20 reps at 0–3 RIR; autoregulated double progression, primarily non-specific, low-demand exercises. Length 4–8 weeks per timeline, gradually reduce secondary lift volume by 1–2 sets every 1–2 weeks (e.g., 10 sets in weeks 1–2, 9 sets in weeks 3–4, 8 sets in weeks 5–6, and 6 sets in weeks 7–8). TABLE 7.13. SUMMARY TABLE: THE PEAK PHASE Goal Peak strength, maintain muscle. Main lifts 2–5 singles/each/week at 7–10 RPE (3–0 RIR); 0–3 back-off sets/single at 5–8 RPE (5–2 RIR). If 3–4 weeks, progress from 4 to 2 reps/set (~85% 1RM). Use variations if needed. Secondary lifts 0–4 sets/week/main lift muscle group, mostly 6–20 reps at 0–3 RIR; autoregulated double progression; primarily non-specific, low-demand exercises. Length 2–4 weeks, 2 weeks if the volume and load phase lasted 10–12 weeks, 3 weeks if 13–15 weeks, 4 weeks if 16+ weeks. Decrease the back-off set and secondary lift volume weekly. When Progress Plateaus Finally, you’ll need to consider what to do when progress plateaus. Remember, the first step is determining if you’re actually plateaued, which starts with having realistic expectations for progression based on your training status, as shown in the following table. TABLE 7.14. TRAINING STATUS DEFINITION AND ESTIMATED AVERAGE RATES OF PROGRESS Novice Able to add load and/or reps each time a lift is repeated in the same week or from week to week. This phase can last for years but may be as short as 6 months with consistent, progressive training, sufficient recovery, and effort. Intermediate Progress slows. You might add reps in the 10–20 rep range week to week, or add load in lower rep ranges month to month. With appropriate training, most reach this stage by year 1 and may remain here through years 4–5. Many never progress past it. Advanced Gains are much slower. You may add a rep or two in the 10–20 rep range month to month, or make small increases in reps or load in lower rep ranges over longer timeframes. Progress becomes increasingly difficult as you approach your muscular potential. Most lifters never reach this phase. With this understanding, you can then use the plateau flowchart to assess the potential cause and remedy for plateaus you encounter. Finally, remember the utility of reactive deloads based on weekly self-assessments shown below the flowchart, and you’ve got all the tools needed to keep the program on track. Assessing and Responding To Plateaus Flowchart REACTIVE DELOAD SELF-ASSESSMENT TABLE After completing a week of training and days off are you: Y/N? Dreading the gym? Sleep worse than normal? Loads or reps at the same load, decreasing from the last training cycle? Sleep worse than normal? Aches and pain worse than normal? Yes to 0–1 questions: carry on. Yes to 2 or more questions: consider a deload. Step 4: Exercise Selection Now that you know what you’ll be doing in the long, mid, and short term, it’s time to match exercises with the RIRs/RPEs, repetition ranges, and sets you’ve planned. As a reminder, the principles of exercise selection are summarized here in the table from Level 4. TABLE 7.16. SUMMARY OF EXERCISE SELECTION RECOMMENDATIONS Strength Use your main lifts to achieve the target volume for those lifts unless you have a low tolerance for their total volume. In that case, select variations with high carryover based on your biomechanics, injury history, technical needs, and/or sticking points. For hypertrophy work, choose less fatiguing, higher-rep exercises that are quicker to set up and perform. Hypertrophy Following the principles of feasibility and ensuring the target muscle is both trained and challenged at long lengths, choose 1–3 lifts for each of the six core movement patterns (Squat, Hip Hinge, Vertical Push, Vertical Pull, Horizontal Push, and Horizontal Pull — 7.17). Include: An incline press. An elbow-flared row plus a shoulder-extension–dominant row. At least one isolation exercise each for the quads, hamstrings, biceps, triceps, middle delts, and calves. For hypertrophy and secondary strength exercise selection, slot in lifts to meet your weekly muscle group volume targets. Remember the fractional set counting method: For hypertrophy, sets count as 1 for primary muscle groups and 0.5 for secondary muscle groups. For strength, sets of the main lift count as 1 for that lift, and all other lifts that train any of the same muscles count as 0.5 . Remember, this is a tracking tool , not a literal representation of stimulus. Some exercises will be more or less effective for growing certain muscles, or will transfer more or less to a given lift. The list below will help you choose exercises and track volume. TABLE 7.17. HYPERTROPHY: EXERCISES AND MUSCLE GROUPS TRAINED Movement Pattern Primary Muscle Groups Secondary Muscle Groups Squat (all variations, leg press, single leg variants, etc.) Quads, Glutes Erectors (if free weights) Hip Hinge (deadlift variations, good morning, back ext) Glutes, Hams, Erectors Scapular Retractors Vertical Pull (chins, lat pull) Lats, Scapular Depressors Rear Delts, Bis Vertical Push (OHP variations) Anterior Delts Triceps, Middle Delts Horizontal Pull (row variations) Lats, Scapular Retractors Rear Delts, Bis, Middle Delts (face pull) Horizontal Push (flat, incline, decline variants) Chest, Anterior Delts Tris, Middle Delts (incline) Horizontal Hip Extension (hip thrust, glute bridge, etc.) Glutes Hams Pull Over (DB, BB, cable, machine) Lats Chest, Rear Delts, Tris (secondary, only long head) Upright Row (DB, BB, cable) Scapular Elevators, Middle Delts Rear Delts, Bis Fly (cable, DB, machine) Chest, Anterior Delts N/A Isolation Exercises Target muscle N/A Steps 5 and 6: Rest Periods and Tempo At this stage, there’s not much left to finalize. Ensure your rest periods are appropriate for your goals on each lift, and that your tempos align with the intended training effect. Consider whether you can incorporate antagonist-paired sets , peripheral-paired sets , drop sets , or rest-pause techniques to save time. Use them only with suitable exercise combinations and if your cardiorespiratory fitness allows. Congratulations, you’ve now built a fully customized program aligned with The Pyramid! Warming Up The purposes of a warm-up are to prepare you for the training to come, potentially enhancing performance, and hopefully reducing injury risk. One of the primary mechanisms by which a warm-up achieves this is by raising body temperature, which has beneficial physiological effects that include increasing muscle blood flow and oxygen availability, and also increasing the speed and sensitivity of the neuromuscular system [1]. Does Stretching Have a Role? While stretching to enhance flexibility is traditionally performed as a part of a warm-up [1], static stretching to the point where flexibility increases acutely prior to training can reduce strength and power [2]. This makes sense if you think about it: making a muscle tendon unit more compliant and forcing it to “relax” so that it elongates, intuitively conflicts with the goal of making it contract forcefully. Some have argued that this short-term performance drop may be worth it if stretching reduces injury risk, but while warm-ups in general (including stretching of any type) reduce injury risk [3], a 2025 meta-analysis of 15 trials with over 9,000 participants found no independent effect of stretching alone [4] On the other hand, ‘dynamic’ stretching warm-ups (active bodyweight stretching drills) can actually slightly increase muscular performance [2]. However, static stretching may be useful in cases where you want a targeted improvement in flexibility for a specific joint prior to training that is challenging to achieve with a dynamic warm-up. For example, if tight calves prevent a full ROM squat without rising onto the toes or causing an early “butt wink,” static calf stretching has a clear application. Fortunately, the data also indicates that combining static and dynamic stretching in warm-up routines, if dynamic stretching is performed last, also improves performance [2]. This approach is especially useful for athletes with high mobility demands, such as weightlifters, where greater depth in the snatch or clean & jerk allows heavier lifts, or powerlifters who need extra ROM to achieve pain-free bar positioning (e.g., tight pecs or shoulders in the low-bar squat, or tight triceps/forearms in the clean-grip front squat). In each case, static and/or dynamic stretching prior to training may be appropriate. So long as stretching concludes with a dynamic approach, there will be no harm and likely a small benefit. In practice: If you need flexibility in a muscle you aren’t training (e.g., pecs and delts during low-bar squats), static stretch freely, as its reduced contractile force won’t matter. If you need flexibility in a muscle you are training : If the ROM requirement is minor, brief static stretching (<60 s) not taken to discomfort is fine, but it won’t meaningfully increase flexibility. For greater needs, follow static stretching with dynamic stretching, or use an extended, lift-specific warm-up, gradually increasing ROM each rep. Foam rolling for ~60 s with moderate pressure can also increase ROM and, like dynamic stretching, may slightly boost performance [5]. Thus, you can do static stretching, dynamic stretching, or foam rolling in a warm-up, so long as it doesn’t conclude with long-duration static stretching, to get beneficial effects on performance and slightly reduce injury risk. Ultimately, however, stretching (of any type) is only necessary if you have specific mobility requirements that lifting itself doesn’t address . Lifting as Stretching Lifting itself improves ROM. Full-ROM lifting is essentially loaded dynamic stretching. A 2023 meta-analysis of 55 studies involving 2,756 participants found no significant difference in ROM improvements between resistance training and stretching [6]. Ironically, or perhaps obviously, in most cases, lifting through a full ROM is all you need to maintain or develop it. The key is to perform warm-up sets with gradually increasing loads until you reach the desired ROM, rather than jumping straight into heavy sets before mobility is sufficient (which can lead to compensation at other joints). There are, however, situations where lifting isn’t ideal for improving ROM. In certain lifts, especially for those with limited mobility, performing the movement at all, even with light loads, may be impossible. This is common in weightlifting variations like cleans, snatches, overhead squats, front squats with a clean grip, or squat jerks, where the bar cannot be kept over the center of mass without adequate mobility. Even if a lifter can move the weight while out of position, doing so is counterproductive, as it ingrains poor technique in these skill-dependent lifts. In such cases, static stretching, dynamic stretching, dowel-based dynamic warm-ups, foam rolling, or a combination of these strategies may be needed before warm-up sets. Finally, in competition (e.g., weightlifting or powerlifting meets), foam rolling, static stretching, and certain dynamic stretches may be preferable to lifting as a way to improve ROM. This can reduce the number of warm-up sets needed, helping preserve maximal strength and minimize fatigue. Optimizing Your Warm-Up For Performance Again, the main mechanism by which a warm-up improves performance (and potentially reduces injury risk) is physiological changes directly and indirectly related to raising body temperature (both core and tissue-specific temperature). Traditionally, this has meant doing a general warm-up (e.g., light jogging or cycling) followed by a sport-specific warm-up (e.g., dynamic stretching and warm-up sets). In reality, this sequence is only necessary if it’s what it takes to get warm. Dynamic stretching alone has been shown to consistently improve performance when it lasts ~7–10 minutes [2], likely because it’s enough to raise temperature. If you warm up slowly or train in a cold environment, adding 5–10 minutes of low-intensity aerobic activity beforehand can help. A dynamic warm-up consists of bodyweight, active-movement drills that move joints through their range, gradually increasing ROM and force. If you skip the general aerobic warm-up, make sure your dynamic warm-up is full-body and takes 7–10 minutes. For strength and physique athletes, the “sport-specific” portion of the warm-up is your warm-up sets . Perform more warm-up sets on the first exercises for each muscle group. Then, a single warm-up set is often all that’s needed for subsequent free weight exercises for that muscle to familiarize the movement, and on machines, you may not need any more warm-up sets. Again, your warm-up could conceivably consist of only these sport-specific warm-up sets with no general or dynamic warm-up. This, however, depends on the person, the time of day they train, their climate, gym environment, presence or lack of DOMS, and personal preference. Consider that sessions are generally organized with multijoint, free weight exercises first, and even warm-up sets are loaded, so sport-specific warm-up sets can get you warmer more quickly than dynamic stretching. Thus, if you perform your warm-ups with intent (increasing ROM and concentric speed as you go), it’s often enough to get the job done. Research supports specific warm-ups for lifting, though the effects are mixed. Some studies find no improvement [7, 8, 9], while others show slight gains in velocity, total work, or reps to failure, with the most consistent benefit occurring after 1–2 warm-up sets with a moderate load (60–80% of the working weight) [10, 11]. Another related concept is post-activation performance enhancement (PAPE) , which refers to the acute improvement in sprint, jump, or resistance training performance 5–15 minutes after a heavy set (e.g., squats for several reps at ≥80% 1RM). A 2025 systematic review by Botton [12] summarized the effects of PAPE on subsequent repetitions to failure in the squat, bench press, and leg press. They reported enhancement in six of nine included studies, with reps to failure improved by ~1–7 when an effect was observed. However, in most studies, the improvement was only ~1–2 reps. Taking a broader look at athletic task performance after PAPE, Xu and colleagues [13] concluded that PAPE can lead to small performance improvements in their 2025 meta-analysis of 62 studies with a collective 1039 participants. However, they noted the effects likely overlap, at least in part, with warm-ups broadly. The underlying mechanisms behind PAPE are still being investigated, but PAPE may improve performance independent of a warm-up effect by enhancing neuromuscular, metabolic, or energy conditions in muscle, or psychological readiness, ultimately enhancing force production [13, 14]. Protocols that most consistently enhance resistance training back-off set performance consist of 1–2 sets of 1–3 reps with ~85-90% of 1RM [12]. The good news is that the singles performed in the Strength Progression System fit this bill, likely providing a slight boost to subsequent sets. Considering all of this context, the Warm-up Summary Guidelines table provides a sample warm-up to perform before training. Feel free to personalize it as the goal is to increase core temperature and prepare muscles for high forces in the ROM needed, making certain components optional per your individual physiology, preferences, and training environment. TABLE 7.18. WARM-UP SUMMARY GUIDELINES Warm-Up Component Description General Optional – 5 minutes of light aerobic activity. Dynamic Optional – 3–5-minute (7–10 minutes without general warm-up) of active stretching drills; gradually increase ROM and force. Specific for ≤6-Repetition Sets Ascending sets with percentage of target working weight with 1–2-minute rest between: 5–10 reps ≤40% (Optional with a general or dynamic warm-up) 3–5 reps ~60%1–3 reps ~80%1 rep 90% Specific for ≥6-Repetition Sets Ascending sets with percentage of target working weight with 1–2-minute rest between: 5–10 reps 40% (Optional with a general or dynamic warm-up) 4–6 reps ~60% 2–4 reps ~80% 1–2 reps 85–90% ( Optional PAPE, use %1RM, not target weight) Dual Athletes Some athletes compete in both strength and physique sports, sometimes simultaneously in the same season, but more often in separate phases. Some bodybuilders compete in strength sports in the offseason to maintain competitive drive, encourage progression, and have the bounds of an appropriate weight class to prevent excessive fat gain. Some strength athletes compete in bodybuilding shows after a weight cut to a weight class that requires them to be very lean. Further, some athletes equally enjoy and compete in both sports without a primary focus. Finally, many non-competitors are simply interested in getting big and strong. Non-Competitive “Powerbuilders” Some argue that training for strength and hypertrophy at the same time dilutes your efforts, producing a poor overall stimulus-to-fatigue ratio. They claim this slows progress and ultimately caps your potential in both. While this isn’t entirely false, it’s almost never a concern for non-competitors and is only relevant to those already approaching their peak potential. Non-competitors interested in getting bigger and stronger — which describes most lifters — rarely push the limits of the training they can recover from regularly (nor should they). Thus, any theoretical inefficiency remains theoretical. Likewise, most non-competitors never get close enough to their peak potential for this theoretical inefficiency to become the bottleneck to future progress. In the majority of cases, logistics and life are the bottlenecks that hold people back. More often, non-competitors simply aren’t concerned about surpassing these bottlenecks to become advanced. Most lifters comfortably settle as lifelong late-stage intermediates, and there is nothing wrong with this. There are no objective benefits for health, (non-strength) sport performance, or general fitness from being at 80% versus 99% of your peak strength potential. Likewise, to anyone who is not a bodybuilding aficionado, or outside of the bodybuilding-centric or adjacent social media bubble, they will be equally impressed (and likely more attracted to) your physique at 80% peak muscularity at a moderately lean, yet healthy and sustainable body fat, than at 99% peak muscularity ripped to shreds. Many lifters never set the goal to completely fill their strength or hypertrophy genetic cup to the brim in the first place. Even for those who do, their priorities shift as they age and mature. Before most non-competitors become advanced, they shift their goals to be more health-oriented, or the value proposition of gaining 5 lb on their squat or 1 lb of muscle after a year of training as hard as they can is no longer worthwhile. For these non-competitors who think of themselves as “powerbuilders,” there’s no need to read further. Simply follow our strength training guidelines, using the higher end of the non-specific volumes and the lower end of the main-lift volumes. The rest of this section is aimed at dual athletes, those who love both strength and physique sports and want the most effective approach to competing in both. For the Physique Athlete Who Competes in Strength Sport If you are primarily a physique athlete, but you enjoy competing in strength sport during the offseason, or perhaps in a lighter weight class on the way to dieting down for your shows, your default training approach should be the Hypertrophy Progression System with some minor additions. When in bodybuilding-focused phases (either offseason or prep) with no meet within the next 3–4 months, simply add 1–2 singles per week on the main lifts for your chosen strength sport. Start some sessions by working up to a single in the 5–8 RPE range to maintain proficiency. If your limb proportions, height, and injury resilience allow you to handle a higher main-lift volume without recovery issues, you can incorporate main lifts or close variations directly into your hypertrophy work: Powerlifters: Squat, bench press, and/or deadlift, or close variations (high-bar squat, close-grip bench press, RDL) in the 4–8 rep range. Weightlifters: Front squats, OHP, clean pulls, and snatch-grip deadlifts with controlled eccentrics in the 4–8 rep range. Strongmen/women: Squat variations, OHP variations, conventional deadlifts, and walking lunges, while opting for higher repetitions as appropriate based on the events they want these lifts to transfer to. However, if you’re not well-suited for long hypertrophy phases with these demanding lifts, stick to the main-lift singles and wait until you’re 3–4 months out from a meet to shift toward more specific strength work. At that point, switch to the Strength Progression System with modifications: Keep hypertrophy work for all muscle groups when selecting secondary lifts (e.g., a powerlifting bodybuilder would still include direct biceps, middle/rear delt, and calf work; a weightlifting or strongman/woman bodybuilder would still include chest work). The volume phase can be shortened or skipped if you’ve been doing hypertrophy work on main lifts or high-transfer variations; in that case, start with the load phase . If your bodybuilding training only includes singles, you should probably include a shortened version of the volume phase that has more secondary exercises that provide transfer to your main lifts. Outside of prep, you can run the peak phase as written, as even without hypertrophy work, as any small size loss will be quickly regained. However, if your meet occurs during contest prep , maintain the secondary lift volume of the strength phase into the peak phase , keeping in low-volume hypertrophy work for all muscles as you are more prone to muscle loss in prep. You will likely need to reduce the main lift single and back-off set frequency and volume to accommodate this for recovery since you’re dieting. For the Strength Athlete Who Competes in Physique Sport If you primarily compete in strength sport, but you occasionally compete in physique shows after the process of dieting for a weight class, your default training should be the Strength Progression System with minor modifications. As explained in the For the Physique Athlete Who Competes in Strength Sport section, include some hypertrophy work for all muscle groups, not just those that contribute to your competition lifts, in volume phases and strength phases . When you have no meets planned in the next 3–4 months and are dieting for a physique contest, shift to the Hypertrophy Progression System with several added main-lift singles. This keeps your technical proficiency sharp while focusing the bulk of your training on hypertrophy. Even in a calorie deficit, you can often make muscle gains in certain muscle groups with a lower training status, despite being in a dieting phase. For the True Dual Athlete If you place equal importance on both strength and physique competition, your approach will shift based on which event is on the horizon. When you are in the offseason from physique sport and actively competing in strength sport, follow the recommendations outlined in For the Strength Athlete Who Competes in Physique Sport. Once you are three to six months out from starting bodybuilding contest prep — and especially if you have a meet scheduled during prep — switch to the recommendations in For the Physique Athlete Who Competes in Strength Sport. This ensures you maintain strength while prioritizing physique goals and managing the recovery demands of dieting. If you have found this helpful, you might be pleased to know it is just a small section taken from our best-selling Muscle and Strength Pyramid books . Join 200,000 other readers, get your copies here . Thank you for reading. Questions welcomed in the comments. References Shellock, F.G., Prentice W.E. Warming-up and stretching for improved physical performance and prevention of sports-related injuries . Sports Med, 1985. 2 (4): p. 267–78. Li, F.Y., Guo, C.G., Li, H.S., Xu, H.R., Sun, P. A systematic review and net meta-analysis of the effects of different warm-up methods on the acute effects of lower limb explosive strength . BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil, 2023. 15 (1): p. 106. Bunn, P.D.S., Sodré, R.D.S., Matos, M.I., et al. Effects of prevention programmes on injury risk in military personnel: a systematic review with meta-analysis . BMJ Mil Health, 2024. 170 (6): p. 529–36. Afonso, J., Martins, R., Thapa, R.K., Lohmann, L.H., Andrade, R., Behm, D., et al. How effective is stretching for injury prevention? A large-scale systematic review with meta-analysis . OSF Preprints, 2025. Konrad, A., Tilp, M., Nakamura, M. A Comparison of the Effects of Foam Rolling and Stretching on Physical Performance. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Physiol. 2021;12:720531. Alizadeh, S., Daneshjoo, A., Zahiri, A., et al. Resistance Training Induces Improvements in Range of Motion: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med, 2023. 53 (3): p. 707–22. Ribeiro, A.S., Romanzini, M., Schoenfeld, B.J., Souza, M.F., Avelar, A., Cyrino, E.S. Effect of different warm-up procedures on the performance of resistance training exercises . Percept Mot Skills, 2014. 119 (1): p. 133–45. Lisboa, F., Kassiano, W., Stavinski, N., et al. Effects of static stretching and specific warm-up on the repetition performance in upper- and lower-limb exercises in resistance-trained older women . Aging Clin Exp Res, 2024. 37 (1): p. 14. Enes, A., Mohan, A., Pinero, A., et al. Warming up to improved performance? Effects of different specific warm-up protocols on neuromuscular performance in trained individuals . SportRxiv, 2025. Ribeiro, B., Pereira, A., Neves, P.P., et al. The Role of Specific Warm-up during Bench Press and Squat Exercises: A Novel Approach . Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2020. 17 (18): p. 6882. Viveiros, L., Gioia, K., Nasser, I., et al. High-load and low-volume warm-up increases performance in a resistance training session . J Bodyw Mov Ther, 2024. 40 : p. 1487–91. Botton, C.E., Gama, M.C., Oliveira, C.B., de Oliveira, F.D., Brusco, C.M. Post-activation performance enhancement, is this strategy recommended to increase the strength training volume? A systematic review . Sport Sciences for Health, 2025. 21 (1): p. 15–25. Xu, K., Blazevich, A.J., Boullosa, D., et al. Optimizing Post-activation Performance Enhancement in Athletic Tasks: A Systematic Review with Meta-analysis for Prescription Variables and Research Methods . Sports Med, 2025. 55 (4): p. 977–1008. Blazevich, A.J., Babault, N. Post-activation Potentiation Versus Post-activation Performance Enhancement in Humans: Historical Perspective, Underlying Mechanisms, and Current Issues . Front Physiol, 2019. 10 : p. 1359. About The Author Eric Helms, Andy Morgan and Andrea Valdez Eric is a coach, athlete, author, educator, and researcher. Andy Morgan is a coach, author, and educator. Andrea Valdez is a lifelong athlete, coach, and content creator. They co-authored the Muscle and Strength Pyramid books. ⠀ Ripped Body is Andy's website, where he's been writing since 2011. If online coaching is of interest, details are here . Got a question? Ask me below Please keep questions on topic, write clearly, concisely, and don't post diet calculations. 700 Label Name* Email* Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Got a question? Ask me below Please keep questions on topic, write clearly, concisely, and don't post diet calculations. Label Name* Email* Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Privacy policy . 202 Comments Marc April 25, 2026 17:50 Thanks Andy, I’ll move on to the beginner program next. For now, I don’t feel capable of creating a program because I don’t know my strengths or weaknesses. I had a question for you. You said that to work all the muscles in all areas, you need the 6 fundamental movements and include an incline press, a wide-grip row, and a dominant shoulder row, but I don’t understand which exercise you’re referring to? (dominant shoulder row) Reply Admin Andy Morgan April 27, 2026 13:01 Reply to Marc This simply means to perform one row with elbows high (45~90º from the body, often done with a wider grip) and another with elbows tucked closer to the body (necessitating a narrower grip). Reply Marc April 27, 2026 19:42 Reply to Andy Morgan Thank you very much Andy for your answer. Reply Admin Andy Morgan April 28, 2026 12:36 Reply to Marc Most welcome! Reply Marc April 23, 2026 16:17 Hi Andy, so here we go with the Big 3 program as you explained. I started with 3 weeks of 3 sessions per week. Then, I wanted to do 6 sets per muscle group per week, and then every 3 weeks, if my recovery is good, increase by 2 sets until I find the right volume for my recovery. Do you think that’s okay, or should I go straight to 10 sets per muscle group? Reply Admin Andy Morgan April 24, 2026 09:50 Reply to Marc Hi Marc, The purpose of the big 3 program is to build familiarity with those lifts. It’s recommended for beginners/novices, and the only variable you’ll need to adjust is load. I wouldn’t try to mix that program with these instructions as it will likely be too much to recover and benefit from. When you graduate from that program (when it no longer produces progress), use these instructions to build yourself a program or modify one of the MSP sample programs. Reply Elliot April 4, 2026 05:26 Hi Andy, I have been following your body building and nutrition advice for a couple of years now with good results. A step change in my progress and consistency has been taking a deload week (full week no gym) every 4th week which gives my body and mind a good rest (I’m 47). I use progressive overload every session to progress. How heavy would you typically say I should lift every time I come back from my deload week? I.e same weight as before deload, less or more as per progressive overload. Thanks so much. Reply Admin Andy Morgan April 4, 2026 06:56 Reply to Elliot Hi Elliot, Pick up where you left off. Note that this doesn’t necessarily mean exactly the same weight and reps, as the RIR/RPE may change post-deload and you’ll want to adjust accordingly. More on this here: How to Make Progress With Your Training Glad you have found the guides helpful. Reply Elliot April 5, 2026 02:38 Reply to Andy Morgan Thanks Andy! The guides are excellent Reply Douglas February 10, 2026 12:58 Hi Andy, congratulations on your new book! I’ve really enjoyed working with you before, and I’m looking forward to working together again in the near future for a proper bulk. Quick question: In your example programs spreadsheet, you mentioned alternating between (1) Chest & Back with Quads & Calves and (2) Arms & Middle/Rear Delts with Glutes & Hamstrings. But when I look at the BB 4-day program, it includes calf raises every day. Is there a specific reason you decided to program calves on all four sessions? Also, would it make sense to swap one of the horizontal pressing movements for a cable or dumbbell fly? Reply Admin Andy Morgan February 11, 2026 08:49 Reply to Douglas Hi Doug, great to hear from you! 1. Thank you for pointing that out. I discussed this with Eric and have now added the following note to the MSP programs sheet for the 3, 4, 5, and 6-day BB programs: “The MSP Training book describes pairing calves with quads; however, here we train calves every session to avoid needing twice as many sets to achieve the target volume. If you prefer to maintain the setup described in the text, where calves are trained with quads, you can simply double the number of sets performed to maintain the volume, or do the listed number of sets (or somewhere between) if you are fine with a lower calf volume than listed.” 2. You can if you wish. They both train the chest to a similar degree (albeit without the additional triceps stimulation). So, if you love flys and they feel great, feel free to swap them in! Reply Marc January 7, 2026 20:01 Hello Andy, congratulations on your 3rd edition! Thank you for sharing part of your book. I’m in France and it’s not translated, so I’m taking advantage of your website. I just wanted to ask you, in the exercise selection section you tell me to look at Table 4 for the 6 fundamental exercises, but I don’t see Table 4 and I don’t know what the 6 fundamental exercises are. Thank you in advance for your reply. Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 8, 2026 06:05 Reply to Marc Hi Marc, can you quote (copy and past the text) the sentences that are confusing you. I couldn’t find what you mean. Reply Marc January 8, 2026 11:52 Reply to Andy Morgan Hello Andy, and thank you for your quick reply. So, these are the six fundamental movements, but I don’t understand what they are. “En respectant les principes de faisabilité et en veillant à ce que le muscle ciblé soit sollicité sur de longues distances, choisissez 1 à 3 exercices pour chacun des six mouvements fondamentaux. Incluez : un développé incliné ; un rowing coudes écartés et un rowing avec extension des épaules ;” Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 9, 2026 06:41 Reply to Marc Ah, you’ve been reading using Google translate. In Step 4, Table 7.16 I say, “choose 1–3 lifts for each of the six core movement patterns.” These are the Squat, Hip Hinge, Vertical Push, Vertical Pull, Horizontal Push, and Horizontal Pull. (The first six columns of the next table.) Thanks for asking. I’ll add that. Reply Cointet January 9, 2026 20:55 Reply to Andy Morgan Hi Andy, thanks so much for your reply. Yes, I use Google Translate . I find your philosophy and vision of bodybuilding to be the best. And since I’m natural, well, it’s a real goldmine. Thank you all and the whole team that supports you for everything. If you come to France, I’d be happy to buy you a beer; I’m from Lyon. Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 12, 2026 07:19 Reply to Cointet Most welcome, Marc. And thank you. I hope to take you up on that sometime! Reply Ian January 1, 2026 14:52 Hi Team MSP, Happy new year! Also, congratulations on the release of the Pyramids 3rd edition & thanks for updating this guide with it. If I can be pedantic, I believe there’s an error on VIF section, Table 7.3, the 4 rows below RIR row under Hypertrophy column, which as of this writing are: 4–6RM: 4-0 RIR 6–8RM: 3 RIR to failure 8–12RM: 2 RIR to failure >12RM: 1 RIR to failure It seems RM is a mistype and should be rep range. Because the first line if applied would lead to doing triples, doubles, singles, and even nothing (4 RM load with 4 RIR = ?) for hypertrophy training, unless I’m misinterpreting the entire thing in which case I do apologize for. Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 1, 2026 16:06 Reply to Ian Hi Ian, thank you for taking the time to comment and asking about this. This isn’t a mistake, it should be taken to mean that the higher the loads used (lower RM), the further away from failure (the higher the RIR) it is advisable to train. Conversely, the lighter the loads (higher RM), the closer to failure it is advisable to train. Reply Ian January 3, 2026 09:02 Reply to Andy Morgan Hi Andy, Thanks for replying. If that wasn’t a mistype & if you wouldn’t mind, may I suggest rewriting the 1st 2 lines that I brought into question like this: 4-6RM: avoid failure⁵ 7-8RM: 3 RIR to failure Explicitly listing 4-0 rir on the 1st line in question easily makes it look like you’re recommending singles/doubles/triples with 4-6RM loads for hypertrophy, which contradicts footnote 5. Including 6RM on the 2nd line in question makes it look like you’re recommending triples with a 6RM load for hypertrophy, which again, contradicts footnote 5. the higher the loads used (lower RM), the further away from failure (the higher the RIR) it is advisable to train For hypertrophy training, this advice can’t be applied to 4-6 RM loads if we’re going to take the ≥4 reps requirement on footnote 5 seriously. Unless of course it shouldn’t be taken seriously in which case, why is it even there? Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 3, 2026 14:59 Reply to Ian Hi Ian, Discussed it with Eric. We’ll change “RM” for “reps/set” to clarify things. So, “4–6RM: 4–0 RIR” has become “4–6 reps/set: 4–0 RIR,” etc. You’ll see I have made this change in the table. We appreciate the feedback! Reply Guilherme May 26, 2024 16:22 Hi Andy, I’m an intermediate rock climber and I climb three times per week, which involves a high load on back, delts, biceps and forearms. What would you consider to be the optimal scheduling between climbing and lifting sessions? I currently try to do a three day split of climbing -> gym -> rest day and each gym day is also a three day split, so I have a 9 day total cycle before completing all three workouts. The main issue here is that pull day feels weak after climbing. Is climbing 3x/week having an overly negative impact on strength training to justify reducing the frequency to 2x/week or even 1x/week? Thank you in advance! Reply Admin Andy Morgan May 27, 2024 05:54 Reply to Guilherme Hi Guilherme, your climbing will work a lot of your body, but it’s particularly heavy with vertical pull and grip work. If you have a upper push , upper pull , lower split, I would consider doing the pull day after a climbing session, but dropping the vertical pull work. Use straps so you aren’t limited by your ability to grip. This assumes your climbing is most important. Otherwise, switch. Reply Sean April 28, 2024 07:11 Hi Andy, How do you count volume? Do you include secondary muscle work in the volume count? For instance, do you count 3 sets of tricep volume (in addition to chest) when you do 3 sets of bench press? Or something like a deadlift would you count it as back, glute and hamstring volume? Thanks in advance! Reply Admin Andy Morgan April 29, 2024 07:08 Reply to Sean Hi Sean! Yes, we do! Reply David August 28, 2023 02:02 Hi Andy, what do you think about doing push pull workouts (lower pushing included in push days and lower pulling included in pull days) instead of upper lower workouts? The only real downside I see is that your lower back and glutes will be trained two days in a row because squats and deadlifts will be separated….do you think is a reasonable way of training? Reply Admin Andy Morgan August 28, 2023 10:37 Reply to David Sure! Reply Terry March 12, 2023 10:53 Hi Andy, How much volume would you recommend for somebody looking just to maintain rather than progress? I’m finally happy with my physique after following the advice in your articles for years now and and looking to free up some time for other activities. Thanks! Reply Admin Andy Morgan March 14, 2023 08:05 Reply to Terry Hi Terry, Based on what I saw during the pandemic with clients, you can probably get away with half of the training volume as long as your weight is stable (caloric maintenance) and your protein intake is kept high. Start with 2/3rds if you wish to be more prudent, and see if you can drop from there. Reply Peter January 9, 2023 18:34 Hello, Happy New Year! I’ve been following your guides and templates. I’m using 4 Day lower/ Upper with S/B/D/B. I feel like I’m not quite getting my intensity down. I’m a beginner using 10-12 sets per movement/ muscle. Which is better to have more exercises less sets or less exercises more sets per day while focus on compounds while still within the guidelines? 5 exercises compared to 3 per day. Thank you. Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 9, 2023 20:15 Reply to Peter As a beginner, fewer exercises. More on this here: https://rippedbody.com/exercise-selection/ "When starting out at the gym you will be tempted to see how heavy you can lift, or try every single exercise and piece of equipment in sight. These are both mistakes. Learning how to perform the exercises properly needs to be your priority. In the next few paragraphs, we’re going to detail the technical reasons for this, but basically, the reason you want to follow this advice is because you will limit your long-term strength gains by loading heavy early on with shitty form. Only by becoming a skilled lifter will you truly be able to lift impressive weights, and skilled lifters treat exercises as skills to master. You want to ingrain the movements such that your body will naturally move in certain ways without you actively thinking about it. By learning the exercises first, instead of picking up some random weight and exercises haphazardly, you will develop your ability to keep proper lifting form under heavy load, and this will enable you to train safely and more effectively. When you haven’t learned how to perform the exercises, your ability to reproduce the same movement is limited. This means that when lifting heavy loads, you will more likely place stress in the wrong places, and not only will you miss out on the training effects that you are after, you will also risk injury. If you take up many different exercises right from the start, you will have many different movements to ingrain. This will often slow down the learning process of each exercise. Resist the temptation to do everything. Limit the number of exercises you start with. Focus on learning the correct form. Now, the focus is on learning how to perform the exercises that are important for you to progress as a trainee, not the actual number of exercises per se. Motor learning is complex. There may be scope for adding exercise variations to facilitate the learning process but deciding what additional exercises will help you learn better, often requires the experience of a coach, hence the recommendation to limit the number of exercises chosen to start when you need to make the decisions yourself." Reply Peter January 19, 2023 10:51 Reply to Andy Morgan Thank you…. I was looking for ways to modify Lower Days, since I don’t have Leg Press, Leg Extensions, and Leg Curls. This article helped out for me to understand. Reply Admin Andy Morgan January 20, 2023 08:52 Reply to Peter Most welcome! Reply Mika December 1, 2022 09:42 Hi Andy! Seems pretty reasonable to me. I have wanted to add some variety to my very simple program that focus on Squat, Bench Press, Deadlift, OHP and pull up. So, I just asked myself which lifts are the most similar to my main lifts? Box Squat, Incline Bench Press, RDL, OHP with dumbbells, cable pull downs, and barbell row come first to my mind. With these its also very easy to achieve the rep goals you suggest (50-75% for big 3 5×5 and 25-50% for others 3×8-12). And, the best part is that I do not have to do front squats I hate (they kill my knees). I am especially interested of box squats these days because I have heard that it is an excellent lift for practicing squat technique. Reply Alex November 14, 2022 04:28 Hi Andy, would you change calories in a deload for a bulk or cut, or keep them the same? Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 14, 2022 07:52 Reply to Alex Hi Alex, I'd keep them the same. Reply Peter June 8, 2022 13:52 Hi I didn’t see in any of your programs. What if someone misses a day because of injury, sleep, or anything. Would recommend some just to skip that day and continue following the program or make up a day? Example Miss a pull day than make it up together with a push day. Adjusting to a upper a day. Or an Upper/ Lower 4 day split. If miss a leg day on Thursday make it up on Saturday or push my schedule. Make legs on Friday and Upper on Saturday. Overall, my question how do adjust when miss a training day? Thank you Reply Admin Andy Morgan June 9, 2022 13:19 Reply to Peter Hi Peter! Catch up by doing it on another day that week if you can, otherwise just skip it. This happens all the time and isn’t a big deal. Reply Peter August 5, 2022 18:53 Reply to Andy Morgan Great!!! Thank you for your time. Last question, for a Autoregulating Deloads under the Post Block Assessment table Aches and Pains, what would consider high week? Would it be anything over 8 or 10 reps? Reply Admin Andy Morgan August 7, 2022 11:05 Reply to Peter Significantly higher than you are currently doing, to the point where higher reps / lower loading, feels better on your joints. Reply Peter August 7, 2022 16:28 Reply to Andy Morgan Understood…. Thanks again Reply Alex Baldwin June 2, 2022 23:16 Over the past year or so I have dealt gotten into bodyweight calisthenics training. How transferable are these approaches? Does the theory here hold, for example its hard to be in the 1-5 rep range for many of the movements and still provide stimulus? Reply Admin Andy Morgan June 3, 2022 09:32 Reply to Alex Baldwin Hi Alex, the principles are the same — your muscles don’t recognize whether the resistance is bodyweight or external load. If limit yourself to body weight work, you limit your ability to optimize things. Reply Guy B March 12, 2022 21:17 Hey Andy, General question but how do you rate the 6x per week ‘Arnold Split’ (Chest/Back, Shoulders/Arms, Legs, repeat). Providing this is designed with adherence to the volume and intensity principles above of course. I’m doing the intermediate prog from this site at the moment and making decent strength gains but I miss the pump from the Arnold split! Any thoughts or recommendations to make this split work? Thanks, appreciate all your output Reply Admin Andy Morgan March 12, 2022 21:25 Reply to Guy B Hi Guy, my thoughts on programming are summarized in the article. If you’re interested in what I think about your program, see how it fits in with that. Reply Ross December 13, 2021 13:15 Hi Andy, I find the Squat and Deadlift very taxing when done on the same day On Lower days when they are both scheduled in the Bodybuilding routines would you recommend doing a variation with the full lift instead of both the full lifts ie Squat and RDL Deadlift and Front Squat Squat and Weighted Hyper Deadlift and Hack Squat Regards Ross Reply Admin Andy Morgan December 14, 2021 08:16 Reply to Ross Hi Ross, if you lower the loads from what you are used to, work your way up, then make sure you keep to the RPEs, you should be fine. If after trying that (or if you already have) then you feel the need to adjust, you can certainly do that. Reply Nikhil November 5, 2021 18:05 Hello Andy, Thank you for putting up this website and sharing genuine information without selling us magical pills. A couple of questions please What does Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3 refer to in this article? In case I were to make my own program, how would I know what the duration of a program should be? Going by this article, would I be right to assume that I could make my own 12 week program for beginners, intermediate and advanced lifters? Regards, Your new fan – Nikhil Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 6, 2021 09:07 Reply to Nikhil Hi Nikhil, thank you for the kind words and the questions. 1. The levels of the Pyramid. If you missed this part, you missed something absolutely crucial. Scroll up to the pyramid image or search for, “We’ll take you through each level of The Pyramid, highlighting the main points and the subsequent decisions you’ll have to make from each as they relate to building a program.” 2. I don’t see training programs as discrete, unchanging things. (This is more a concept the fitness industry throws at us so programs can be marketed and sold.) You adapt your program over time to keep progressing. The training progression rules , plateau breaking articles will be useful in explaining this further. 3. The first two yes, but if you’re looking to build a program for an advanced trainee, I’d recommend getting our Muscle and Strength Training Pyramid book . Reply Peter November 1, 2021 13:20 Hello.. I followed your hypertrophy matrix. Its a 4 Day Push (upper/lower), Pull (upper/lower), Upper, and Lower. I have 3 compound movements on Push/ Pull days. Upper/ Lower are my hypertrophy days. My volume and frequency for Upper push/ pull match for the weekly sets. My problem is lower. Are lower movement frequency are they total all together for push/ HH or they separated? For novice 12 sets lower push and 12 sets for HH? As a novice is the program should be balance from push/pull/ legs? Is it ok to have legs more or less sets per week? Thank you Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 1, 2021 21:35 Reply to Peter Hi Peter, thank you for the questions. 1. I don’t understand the question. Can you rephrase? 2. Best to balance unless you have reason to do otherwise. Reply Peter November 2, 2021 00:38 Reply to Andy Morgan Sure…. For volume it mentions 10–20 sets per muscle group/movement pattern per week. I didn’t understand movements. What are they? Are the movements push/ pull/ legs/ hip hinge? Horizontal/ vertical push consider 1 movement or separate?. Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 3, 2021 00:18 Reply to Peter Thank you for clarifying. I didn’t understand movements. What are they? Are the movements push/ pull/ legs/ hip hinge? This is covered in part four. Horizontal/ vertical push consider 1 movement or separate? Together when it comes to counting volume. Reply Peter November 3, 2021 17:02 Reply to Andy Morgan I understand that part. Legs I’m confused about. On your Novice Hypertrophy Sample legs/ push/ Pull/ full. Legs are stated at 9 sets. For legs both press and HH are added together? or 9 sets press (quads, calves) and 9 sets HH (DL, HH, leg curls)? Reply Peter November 3, 2021 17:55 Reply to Peter Lower body legs presses and HH movements consider 1 movement too? Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 5, 2021 00:37 Reply to Peter We have two methods of counting volume and separating body parts/movements to help with training program consturction: one is for strength and one is for hypertrophy plans. I believe you’re confusing the two, but I don’t recall quite how and I don’t have time to dig in as I’m away. If you compare the instructions above with the sample training programs, you’ll find the answers. Reply Peter November 5, 2021 01:08 Reply to Andy Morgan I will review the strength & pyramid book as well. Thank you Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 5, 2021 08:36 Reply to Peter Most welcome. Reply Peter November 11, 2021 17:37 Reply to Andy Morgan After review both website and Strength & Pyramid I came up with a routine that I’m satisfy with. Following the Bodybuilding Hypertrophy Training Matrix Choosing Split, my routine Push w/ quads, Pull w/ HH, Lower, Upper. I was following the U,L, F, F example. I turned 1 Full into push/ squats/ leg extensions for quads and another Full pull/ HH/Dl/ Leg curls. I still with in my total weekly sets stated in the article. My questions is about recovery. Which method would be ideal for recovery? 1) Is it best to start Day 1 – Push, Day 2 – Pull, Day 3 Lower, Day 4 – Upper 2) Day 1 – Lower, Day 2 – Upper, Day 3 – Push, Day 4 -Pull 3) or rotate them each week? Many thanks for the articles Reply Admin Andy Morgan November 12, 2021 08:36 Reply to Peter Hi Peter, either could work. There is no one I can point to that is obviously best. Glad you found the books and articles helpful! Reply Joel July 22, 2021 02:40 Hi Andy, what’s your opinion on using “top sets” and “back off sets” for the Squat, Bench & Deadlift. As an intermediate, is this a good idea to use in my programming? Reply Admin Andy Morgan July 22, 2021 09:30 Reply to Joel Hi Joel, you can do that, but I usually program things with straight sets. What’s key is that you have a rule framework around progression so that you manage fatigue. Here’s ours: Linear Progression and Linear Periodization | Rules For Novice and Intermediate Trainees Reply Load Rest of Comments Transform your body without the process taking over your life Get our free Transformation Kickstart course and start seeing results: Lose 1 lb of fat per week, without starving yourself. Beginner & intermediate training programs. A short daily lesson for two weeks to help you avoid the biggest mistakes. GET THE FREE COURSE Join 23,000+ readers. No supplement sales. Unsubscribe anytime. Articles Books Newsletter Results Podcast Coaching Our Why Our Team Contact FAQ Translations Privacy Terms Commercial Disclosure Search Search © 2011-2026 Ripped Body Japan LLC. All rights reserved. Ripped Body® is a registered trademark of Ripped Body LLC. × Scroll to Top Insert