URL: https://rippedbody.com/initial-adjustment/
TITLE: How to Assess and Correct Your Initial Calorie Calculations

Skip to content

 How to Assess and Correct Your Initial Calorie Calculations

 

There are two types of assessment and adjustment needed to be successful.

The first involves assessing your initial calorie calculations and correcting them if you need to do so. I will cover this for both bulking and cutting in this article.

The second type are the ongoing adjustments needed to keep progressing. I discuss those in separate chapters:

 How to Adjust Calories and Macros as You Diet
 How to Adjust Calories and Macros as You Bulk

The most important advice I can give is to wait patiently before assessing your initial calculations. You have to wait long enough for a trend line in the scale weight data to develop; otherwise, you’re just guessing.

Adjusting Your Initial Calorie Calculations When Cutting

The first week of dieting can be super exciting, but then reality sets in. The blue line is how you can expect your body weight data to look:

The body weight changes at the start of a cut can be confusing, even when plotting weekly averages.

The large initial dip you see is due to the loss in gut content, water, and glycogen stores. — Less food eaten means a lower average gut content. Your carb intake will be lower, which means your glycogen stores (and thus water levels) will be lower.

Your first week of data will be fairly useless then. Your second week of data onward starts to become useful, but it takes a few weeks to assess the trend.

Additionally, if you’re new to calorie and macro counting, you can expect to make some mistakes in the first week or two, which will add more noise to the data.

Women need to wait four weeks so they are comparing the same time of their monthly cycle.

For this reason, I suggest you always ignore your first week or two of data before attempting to assess progress.

Finding the Appropriate Initial Calorie Adjustment When Cutting

Let’s say you are aiming to lose 1 lb per week, and your weight data looks as follows:

The rate of weight change evens out after the first week, so discard that first data point.

Looking from the end of week one to the end of week four, it is clear that you’re averaging 1 lb per week of weight loss. As this is in line with your target, no adjustment is needed. This also means that of the five pounds you dropped in the first week, four are likely explained by gut content, water, and glycogen changes. You can expect to gain these back when you bulk or take a diet break.

The trend only becomes clear if you give it time.

But let’s say your rate of weight change was above or below your target. How would you adjust?

Well, we know that we need a daily deficit of approximately 500 calories to lose 1 lb of fat, so here’s the formula we can use:

Daily calorie adjustment = (Actual rate of weight loss – Target rate of weight loss) x 500

 If your rate of weight loss is 0.5 lbs slower than your target, you need to subtract 250 kcal daily.
 If your rate of weight loss is 0.4 lbs faster than your target, you need to add 200 kcal daily.

(Water fluctuations happen with hormonal changes across the menstrual cycle. For this reason, I recommend that women wait one more week so that they can compare their weight data at the same time in their monthly cycle, without the first week of losses screwing up the assessment.)

So now the next question is, “How should I change the macros to achieve these calorie changes?”
I’m glad you asked…

Choosing What Macros to Adjust When Cutting

We want to choose the least compromising way to reduce calories from our diet. Recall from my nutrition setup guidelines the broad function of the three macronutrients:

 Protein is important for satiety and muscle mass retention. 
 Carb intake is important for maintaining training quality.
 Fat intake is important for hormonal function and for keeping your diet from being boring as hell.

Arguably the most important of the three is protein. Unless you’ve set your protein intake higher than I have suggested, I’d recommend that you keep protein the same and reduce calories from a mix of carb and fat intake.

Make your calorie reductions in this ratio when cutting.

If you’re following my macro guidelines, you’ll almost always have a little more room to reduce carbs than fats. Therefore, I’d recommend your calorie reductions come from somewhere between a 1:1 and 2:1 ratio of carb and fat calories, respectively.

Bearing in mind that 1 g of carbs is 4 kcal, and 1 g of fats is 9 kcal, here’s a quick reference table of how to make reductions of different calorie amounts.

MACRO ADJUSTMENT EXAMPLES BY CALORIE AMOUNT WHEN CUTTING

Note: I always round daily macro targets to the nearest 5 g.

 So, if you need to reduce your calorie intake by ~250 kcal, I recommend you achieve this by either reducing 30 g of carbs and 15 g of fats or 40 g of carbs and 10 g of fats daily.
 If you need to increase your calorie intake by ~200 kcal, I recommend you either add 25 g of carbs and 10 g of fats, or 40 g of carbs and 5 g of fats daily.

If you cycle your macros when you come to reduce (or increase) your calories, feel free to adjust your macros on the training and rest days independently.

 So, if you need to reduce your calorie intake by ~250 kcal, it would be fine to achieve this by reducing 30 g of carbs and 15 g of fats on the rest day, and 40 g of carbs and 10 g of fats on the training day instead.

WHAT TO DO IF YOU CYCLE MACROS
Calorie and macro cycling, with higher-calorie, carb, and lower-fat training days; lower-calorie, carb, and higher-fat rest days.
You can set up your diet to have more calories on some days than others. This is sometimes called calorie cycling. As you cannot calorie cycle without the macros changing, it is more commonly referred to as macro cycling.

You’ll have likely read about macro cycling in The Nutrition Setup Guide. If you haven’t read those or don’t recall what was there, the key takeaway is that macro cycling is unlikely to give you a better result than a diet where calories and macros are the same each day. So,

If you feel that macro cycling unnecessarily complicates your diet and you find it harder to adhere to, I recommend you avoid it.

If macro cycling breaks up the monotony of dieting and therefore you find it easier to adhere to, I recommend you consider it.

The simplest and most common way to cycle macros is by adjusting carb intake. — If you have a four-day training week, instead of consuming 200 g each day, for example, you may consume 275 g on your training days and 100 g on your rest days.

You may choose to fluctuate your fat intake also, and this is what I commonly do with clients. But this is because the clients I work with have experience counting their calories and macros, and most appreciate some variety in their diets.

So when you see differing macros for the training and rest day intakes in the client examples later in the book, please don’t be under the impression that it leads to better results.

ADJUSTING INITIAL CALORIE CALCULATIONS WHEN BULKING

Roughly the opposite of what I wrote in the previous section on cutting is true when bulking. But there are some notable differences.

The body weight changes at the start of a bulk can be confusing also.

Your body weight data (represented by the blue line) will look roughly the inverse of what it did when beginning to cut. The trend may take longer to become clear though because your target rate of weight gain is likely to be less than your target rate of weight loss.

(Recall that the recommended rates of weight loss are typically in the 0.5-1% per week; recommended rates of weight gain are in the 0.5-2% of body weight per month.)

Again, the first week of data will be fairly useless, and the second may well be also if you’ve been restricting carb intake and as your glycogen stores will take a while to fill. This means that it would be prudent to wait six or seven weeks before making any adjustments to your bulk calculations.

Yup, you read that correctly.

Sometimes I make changes earlier than this with clients, but I have a ton of experience spotting trends in data. You don’t. Premature adjustments increase noise and make your data harder to interpret. When in doubt, be patient.

Finding The Appropriate Initial Calorie Adjustment When Bulking

Let’s say you are aiming to gain 0.75 lbs per week (~1.5% of your body weight per month), and your weight data looks as follows:

Starting weight160 lbs

End of week 1 average165 lbs

End of week 2 average168.9 lbs

End of week 3 average169.5 lbs

End of week 4 average170.1 lbs

End of week 5 average170.4 lbs

End of week 6 average171.0 lbs

End of week 7 average171.4 lbs

It’s clear that the rate of weight change evens out at the end of week two onward, so discard the first two weeks where you have the glycogen, water, and gut content gains muddying the data.

From the end of week two to the end of week seven, you’ve gained 2.5 lbs, which means you are averaging 0.5 lbs per week of weight gain. This is a rate of 2 lbs per month, which is 1 pound slower than your target. You need to make an adjustment. But how?

The trend can take even longer to become clear when bulking.

It takes roughly ~2500 kcal to build 1 lb of muscle and ~3500 kcal to burn or store 1 lb of fat.
Though some do better than others, on average, I see clients gain fat and muscle in a 1:1 ratio during a bulk phase. So, if we hold this as the assumption, and also assume a 30-day month, we will need a 100 kcal daily caloric surplus to gain 1 lb of weight per month (~220 kcal for 1 kg).

However, recall from the Why We Need To Make Adjustments chapter, that there will be an increase in energy expenditure from NEAT whenever we increase our calorie intake. We can’t predict what this will be, but we know it will happen to a degree, and I suggest we add 50% on the front end to account for it rather than delay things unnecessarily.

This gives us the following heuristic:

To gain 1 lb of weight per month, add 150 kcal each day (330 kcal for 1 kg).

 So, as weight gain was 1 lb short, add in 150 kcal each day.

Choosing What Macros to Adjust When Bulking

When cutting, our concerns were reducing the macros in the least compromising way possible so that training quality and muscle mass retention aren’t affected.

When bulking, our concern shifts toward optimizing for muscle growth without an undue amount of fat gain.

Muscle growth doesn’t happen so quickly to justify increasing protein intake beyond the point where it is initially set. Therefore, as with the cut, the calorie adjustment will come from manipulating the carb and fat amounts.

Make your calorie additions in this ratio when bulking.

As you’ll have read in either The Nutrition Setup Guide or The Muscle and Strength Pyramid: Nutrition, I recommend keeping your fat intake between 20-30% of your total daily calorie intake when bulking. To maintain this, I suggest you make calorie increases by bumping up your carb and fat intake somewhere between a 3:1 and 2:1 ratio, respectively.
Here’s a modified reference table of how to make increases of different calorie amounts:

MACRO ADJUSTMENT EXAMPLES BY CALORIE AMOUNT WHEN BULKING

If you need to increase your calorie intake by ~150 kcal, I recommend you achieve this by adding 25 g of carbs and 5 g of fats to each day.

If you cycle your calorie and macro intake, adjust your training and rest days by the same calorie amount but feel free to choose different macro adjustments to achieve it.

Thank you for reading. This was a sample chapter from my book, The Diet Adjustments Manual .

Questions are welcomed in the comments and I answer daily.

About The Author

 
Andy Morgan
 
Hi! The Ripped Body® Method is an evidence-based, data-driven approach to physique transformation.
⠀
For the majority of my 20s, I fell for the scams of the fitness industry. 
⠀
This site is my revenge. 
⠀
Since 2011, I’ve written guides explaining how we get results to help readers avoid the same path of frustration. We’ve helped over 2,000 busy working guys transform their bodies WITHOUT supplements, fad diets, or the process dominating their lives.
⠀
 Enter your email address in the box at the bottom of this page and I'd be honored to show you how.

Privacy policy.

 11 Comments

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Alexzander

 

 
 January 18, 2025 23:49

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Hello Andy! 

Quick question about ensuring that my calorie tracking is correct. 

I am pretty good with measuring amounts, and confident that I am eating the amount of calories I think I am. 

However, I am still unclear on how to track oils used to cook food. For example one of my go to meals is a cast iron pan seared steak. That process involves a good amount of vegetable oil used. 

In those situations, should the rule be, if its in the pan–track it, or should I just add something like a buffer of 1-200 kcals to account for it? 

Regards,

Alexzander

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 January 19, 2025 07:40

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Alexzander
 

 

 
Hi Alexzander,

“In those situations, should the rule be, if its in the pan–track it, or should I just add something like a buffer of 1-200 kcals to account for it?”

^ What do mean by this?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Whit Peters

 

 
 June 25, 2024 22:09

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Andy, I understand the logic behind waiting as much as 6 to 7 weeks to adjust your macro targets when bulking. However, after my first week of bulking, my one week average indicates that I am still LOSING weight. 

I think the point of your article is to not panic if in the beginning, your rate of weight gain is averaging out HIGHER than your weekly target goal (due to glycogen taking a long time to replenish, etc). 

So, in the case of a person who’s coming in with a rate of weight gain after the first week that’s LOWER, would you advise them to up the calories using the formula? (150*correction amount in pounds)?

Thanks for your thoughts.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 June 26, 2024 08:06

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Whit Peters
 

 

 
Hi Whit, thank you for the question.

I’ve seen that with clients plenty of times also. (Weight fluctuations in the short term.) I’d wait at least another week before drawing conclusions.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Anthony G

 

 
 June 9, 2023 08:24

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
How and when do we determine calorie and macro adjustments when working on recomp?

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 June 9, 2023 08:40

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Anthony G
 

 

 
Hi Anthony, thank you for the question.

Let's define recomp as 1) body weight stable, 2) muscle gained as fat is lost.

Unless activity levels change, calories are held constant. Once protein intake is set, that doesn't need to change either.

And while you could play around with your carb-fat ratio a little to see if you perform better, unless you skewed things heavily to one side initially (I'm thinking mainly of those who were sold the idea of a keto diet who switch to eating more carbs and find their energy levels go through the roof), this isn't likely to do much.

Thus, when things stop measurably working for a recomp, that's it. It's time to choose between a bulk or a cut.

More on that here: https://rippedbody.com/cut-or-bulk

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Anthony G

 

 
 June 9, 2023 10:35

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thanks, Andy.

A little background about myself and some insight on why I am asking this question. I am 5' 8" and recently lost 60lbs over a period of 5 months through intermittent fasting and cardio. I brought my weight down to 160 lbs and would estimate my body fat to be between 15-20%. Once I hit 160 lbs I started lifting 5-6 days a week and taking 5 mg of creatine along with strictly following my macros 260C, 65F, 160P. 2265 Calories. (I would consider myself a beginner) I have now been working out for about 3 weeks and my weight has increased to somewhere between 162 and 164 lbs. I do see noticeable muscle gain already and I have been taking 5mg of creatine per day.

With this information a more specific question I would ask is: During recomp, where we gain muscle and lose fat, should I expect to put on some weight like I have, as I understand muscle weighs more than fat? Or, no, if I am putting on weight I need to cut back my calories in order to maintain my current weight? 

What would be the best way to determine if I need to cut my calories back because I am putting on to much weight and therefore inadvertantly putting myself into the bulking phase?

Thanks in advance!

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 June 12, 2023 07:29

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Anthony G
 

 

 
Hi Anthony,

Bodyweight fluctuates, even when we at the same calorie intake. This is water, gut content, and glycogen.

Creatine pulls water into the muscles and can cause weight increases in the first week or so. (The degree to which this happens differs from person to person.)

Strength training causes muscle swelling (more water pulled into the muscles) and there is muscle growth to consider. 

All of these things hamper your ability to gauge the weight trend. As you'll see in the article, I recommend people wait 4 weeks before seeing if there is a weight trend. (You've waited for just three.) But you might need more than that to see a clear trend.

This article will be helpful: https://rippedbody.com/diet-progress-tracking/

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Anthony G

 

 
 June 12, 2023 09:55

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 Andy Morgan
 

 

 
Thank you Andy, I will review that article and give more time to watch the trends.

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 rohit

 

 
 March 8, 2023 04:56

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
hey andy i bought your book and had a doubt , when i comment here , the word limit is exceeding.

please see the pic here and answer my query .https://imgur.com/tgdtosE

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Author

 

 

 

 

 Andy Morgan

 

 
 March 8, 2023 08:02

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 Reply to 
 
 rohit
 

 

 
Hi Rohit, thank you for getting the book.

Please tighten your question so you can keep to the word limit. Post it here: https://rippedbody.com/adjustments-manual/support/

 

 
 

 
 Reply

 

 
 

 Load Rest of Comments 
 

 
 

 × 

 
 Scroll to Top
 

Insert