Title: How to Make Progress With Your Training
URL: https://rippedbody.com/progression/
Description: This article explains our Hypertrophy Progression System from the 3rd edition of our bestselling book: The Muscle and Strength Pyramid: Training.

===CONTENT===

How to Make Progress With Your Training - Ripped Body® Skip to content No-nonsense Nutrition and Training Guides Now reading How to Make Progress With Your Training Main Menu FREE GUIDES Start Here Nutrition Guides Training Guides Body-fat Pictures Recommended Resources CALCULATORS Calorie and Macro Calculator Target Weight Calculator Body Fat Calculator BOOKS PODCAST YOUTUBE RESULTS Client Results Case Studies COACHING Now reading How to Make Progress With Your Training Main Menu FREE GUIDES Start Here Nutrition Guides Training Guides Body-fat Pictures Recommended Resources CALCULATORS Calorie and Macro Calculator Target Weight Calculator Body Fat Calculator BOOKS PODCAST YOUTUBE RESULTS Client Results Case Studies COACHING How to Make Progress With Your Training Ripped Body Training Guides , The Muscle and Strength Pyramid Books, Sample Chapters and Programs , Training Principles • by Andy Morgan Updated: 28th December, 2025 What follows are the exact initial guidelines on training progression that we give to our Ripped Body coaching clients. They are an abbreviated version of the Hypertrophy Progression System from the 3rd edition of The Muscle and Strength Pyramid: Training , which I co-authored with Eric Helms and Andrea Valdez. These progression guidelines can work with any program, but are designed to go with our free training programs: The Ripped Body Training Programs . The Muscle and Strength Pyramid Example Programs . I’ll start with the how before diving into the why , because fewer people are interested in the theory. CONTENTS : (Click to jump to the corresponding section.) Linear Progression Autoregulated Double Progression Why , When , and How To Deload Training Dose and Progressive Overload The Hypertrophy Progression System Explained What To Do When You Plateau Watch this video on YouTube Linear Progression: When You Can Make Load Increases Every Session The following linear progression rules work well for exercises where you can make incremental weight increases each session. This will be the case if you are relatively new to lifting, new to an exercise, re-learning your form, or returning after time off. How To Choose The Load You Initially Lift With Every lift has a notation next to it that looks something like this: 3×10–15 @2–0 The first number is the number of sets you’ll perform. The second number is the number of reps you’ll target in each set. (This may be a single number or a range.) The third number is RIR (reps in reserve ) and specifies how close to failure — the point where your form breaks down, or you can no longer move the load — you should train. (Ignore RIR for now. I’ll come back to it in a moment.) Perform a few warm-up sets, then choose a load you are confident you’ll feel comfortable performing all the sets and reps (the highest number in the range, if there is one) listed. The first set will be easier than the subsequent sets as fatigue builds. To minimize unnecessary fatigue and soreness and help you get used to the new routine, consider doing one set less than prescribed for all exercises for the first week. Example: Your program says 3×10–15 @2–0 . You think you can lift 40 lbs for 3 sets of 15, but you’re confident you can do 30 lbs, so you start with 30 lbs and do 2 sets of 15. How To Progress After The First Session If you did one set fewer, as advised, then in the next session, perform 3 sets with the same load , aiming for the upper end of the rep range for every set. If you could do that with good form, in the third session, increase the load . For compound movements that use a lot of muscle, consider increasing the load by 10 lbs each session. Other exercises might need to progress in 5-lb (or 2.5-lb increments when possible). There will come a point when it is not possible to increase every session. If the set felt particularly difficult, aim to increase the weight every second session, focusing on the feeling of it being easier in the next session. Try not to train to failure for any of your sets. If you think your next rep will fail, stop the set, even if this means you are short of your rep target. (Avoiding failure is better for skill acquisition, which is the goal right now.) EXAMPLE 1: LINEAR PROGRESSION Here’s how linear progression might look for 3 sets of 15 reps, with 5 lbs as the smallest increment. Session Load Reps Decision for Next Session 1 30 lbs 15, 15 Increase. 2 30 lbs 15, 15, 15 Increase. 3 35 lbs 15, 15, 15 Increase. 4 40 lbs 15, 15, 15 Felt difficult. Same load. 5 40 lbs 15, 15, 15 Felt good. Increase. 6 45 lbs 15, 15, 13 Same load. 7 45 lbs 15, 15, 15 Felt difficult. Same load. 8 45 lbs 15, 15, 15 Felt good. Increase. Once you are no longer able to progress like this, start using Autoregulated Double Progression . (This is part of our broader Hypertrophy Progression System , which I’ll explain in a later section.) Autoregulated Double Progression: When You Cannot Make Load Increases Every Session Training volume and intensity are the primary drivers of adaptation. Autoregulated double progression is a system of progression that ensures overload continues to occur within your training structure [3]. In this system, each lift has a rep range and RIR (Reps in Reserve) range — e.g., 10–15 reps at 0–2 RIR, which we’ll use as an example. Your goal is to select loads that consistently fall within this rep and RIR range, and to increase the load once it becomes too easy to stay within those limits. What is RIR and How Do I Use It? Training volume and intensity are the primary drivers of adaptation. RIR (reps in reserve) is a common way to quantify our proximity to failure , which is a measure of our training intensity. When you see 0–2 RIR in your program, it means that your sets should all finish within 2 reps of failure. RIR and RIR-based RPE TABLE RIR Meaning 0 Max lift, couldn’t do more reps. 0 No more reps, could do slightly more load. 1 Could do 1 more rep. 1–2 Could do 1 more rep, possibility of 2. 2 Could do 2 more reps. 2–3 Could definitely do 2 more reps, possibility of 3. 3 Could do 3 more reps. 4–6 Could do 4 to 6 more reps. How To Use Autoregulated Double Progression Choose a Load for Set 1 After warming up, select a weight you expect to land near the top of the RIR range and the middle or lower end of the rep range. For example, you might pick a weight you think you can do for 12 reps at 2 RIR — i.e., your ~14RM. Stop at the RIR Target Perform the set, stopping once you hit the upper RIR boundary — in this case, 2 RIR — even if you could do more reps. Repeat with the Same Load (If Within Range) If your first set lands within the rep range (e.g., 12 reps), stick with that load for all remaining sets and aim to maintain the same reps. Your RIR will naturally decrease across sets due to cumulative fatigue, but don’t exceed the lower RIR boundary . If after a few sets, your reps fall below the target rep range, that’s fine; these sets are still doing their job. Adjust the Load (If Outside Range) If your reps on your first set were below or above the target rep range, adjust the load on the next set, up or down, making your best guess of what load would put you in the rep range on the next set. If unsure, adjust load ~4% up or down for every rep outside the range. Then perform each subsequent set with this same load. Progress Load When Ready When you can hit the top end of the rep range at the highest end of the RIR range (e.g., 15 reps at 2 RIR) in your first set , increase the load next session. Allow for Fluctuations Performance won’t always progress linearly. Some weeks will regress slightly — that’s normal. Think in terms of trends , not single sessions. As you train week to week, you sometimes might think you are at a higher RIR than you really are during a set, and then accidentally hit a 1 RIR on your first set when you meant to hit a 2 RIR. That’s totally fine. Being a little aggressive, trying to see if you can get more reps, and being a little overzealous now and again is not a bad thing. The following table shows an example of what this might look like for a novice lifter. EXAMPLE 2: AUTOREGULATED DOUBLE PROGRESSION FOR A NOVICE LIFTER Here’s how a novice lifter’s progression may look for 3 sets of 10–15 reps at 0–2 RIR. Session Load Reps First Set RIR 1 40 lbs 12, 12, 11 2 2 40 lbs 14, 14, 12 2 3 40 lbs 15 , 14, 14 2 4 45 lbs 11, 10, 9 2 The following table shows an example of what this might look like for an intermediate lifter. However, realistically, performance fluctuates at times, and you may regress one week before making a larger progression the next week. EXAMPLE 3: AUTOREGULATED DOUBLE PROGRESSION FOR AN INTERMEDIATE LIFTER Here’s how an intermediate lifter’s progression may look for 3 sets of 10–15 reps at 0–2 RIR. Session Load Reps First Set RIR 1 40 lbs 12, 12, 11 2 2 40 lbs 13, 13, 12 2 3 40 lbs 14, 14, 12 2 4 40 lbs 15, 14, 14 1 5 40 lbs 15 , 14, 14 2 6 45 lbs 11, 10, 9 2 Novice, intermediate, and advanced lifters experience progression at different rates using this system. In the intermediate example, it took five sessions for the trainee to progress the load. This is how this model operates when everything is dialed in properly for an intermediate. A novice can increase the load at a faster rate; on the other hand, an advanced lifter might take twice as long to increase the load. This is just an example, and obviously, you will want to adjust according to how you progress. Why, When, and How To Deload Why To Deload Deloads are a recovery tool usually taking the form of a short (usually one-week) period of reduced volume and/or intensity, placed between blocks of harder training. The goal of a deload is to: Manage fatigue and promote recovery . Facilitate long-term progression. We recommend deloads on an as-needed basis rather than as pre-planned components of all programs. When TO Deload Reactive deloads are an autoregulated recovery tool . So, how might you do a reactive deload, one based on how you’re actually feeling rather than a pre-set schedule? We recommend using a weekly self-assessment , ideally including both training and rest days, to evaluate your recovery status. A simple checklist based on Overtraining Syndrome research can help guide this decision. REACTIVE DELOAD SELF-ASSESSMENT TABLE After completing a week of training and days off: Y/N? Are you dreading the gym? Is sleep worse than normal? Are your loads or reps the same or decreasing from the last training cycle? Is stess worse than normal? Are aches and pains worse than normal? If yes to 0–1 questions: carry on. If yes to 2 or more questions: consider a deload. How To Deload You have a few options. There aren’t specific guidelines for what is “optimal” because recovery is dynamic and context-specific. Ultimately, the broad principles of deloading come from tapering, but conceptually, deloads should be a bit more conservative. Specifically, you want to reduce fatigue without detraining. Therefore, don’t reduce volume as much as you would in a taper (~50–80%); instead, reduce sets on all exercises by ~30–50%. This roughly one-third to one-half reduction is what we’d describe as a standard deload , and it’s useful when you feel generally beat up and under-recovered. The general guidelines for a standard deload can be summarized as follows: Volume: Reduce sets by ~30–50% across all exercises. Intensity: Maintain normal loading and proximity to failure. Frequency: Keep the same number of sessions per week. However, you won’t always feel equally recovered throughout your body. It’s not uncommon to feel fine but have lingering lumbar soreness (or soreness in another body region). Using the checklist, this shows up as saying “yes” to experiencing more aches and pains than normal but “no” to the other questions. If that’s the case, you simply deload the exercises that train that area or even remove certain exercises, depending on the severity of your experience. For example, if you feel great overall but have lingering, substantial lumbar soreness, you can do a targeted deload , keeping hack squats, leg extensions, leg curls, and hip thrusts at their normal volume, but remove deadlifts and/or back squats completely next training week. Further, you can mix and match these strategies if you are under-recovered generally and have localized aches and pains. For example, if your lumbar is fatigued and you feel wrecked generally, you can reduce overall volume by 30–50% in a purposefully unbalanced manner, cut out all your sets of squats and deadlifts, but only cut a few sets off your other lower body lifts, and reduce your upper body sets symmetrically. Finally, just because we generally recommend maintaining frequency and intensity (i.e., load and proximity to failure) during a deload doesn’t mean there isn’t a time and a place for adjusting them. For example, if it feels like a waste of time to commute to the gym to train for 30 minutes doing half as many sets, you can restructure your training into fewer days to reduce volume. Let’s say you had a four-day upper/lower split. If the two upper and lower body days were similar in exercise selection and volume, you could do one upper and one lower day, training just twice that week. Similarly, if you experience aches and pains that flare up with heavier loads, but not at higher reps, you could do higher reps for a week for those movements. Ultimately, deloading is about smart fatigue management , not ticking boxes. Let your body (and context) guide the adjustments. Training Dose and Progressive Overload As mentioned earlier, volume and intensity are the primary drivers of adaptation. Together, they determine your overall training dose. Frequency , while sometimes considered separately, is closely tied to both — it’s the primary tool for distributing that dose effectively. VOLUME represents the work performed in training and shares a non-linear relationship with adaptation. It can be expressed as volume load (sets x reps x load) or simply as the number of sets . INTENSITY is a critical but often misunderstood training variable. Many people equate it with how sore they get or how “hardcore” a session feels. But objectively, intensity refers to two specific factors: Load — typically defined as a percentage of your one-rep max (% of 1RM) Proximity to failure — commonly expressed as rating of perceived exertion (RPE) in powerlifting circles or repetitions in reserve (RIR) in bodybuilding circles. For hypertrophy , both volume and proximity to failure (RIR) are key. You need to train close enough to failure for the set to provide a meaningful growth stimulus, especially at lower loads. For strength , however, your 1RM isn’t influenced by how close you are to failure in each set. Instead, specificity is the driving factor, specifically the load you use and the specificity of the movement. Progression and progressive overload are not the same thing Many people believe that progression means doing more than last time — more sets, more reps, more weight, pushing closer to failure. But that’s only half the story. Progression isn’t about what you did last session; it’s about whether that stimulus is still enough to challenge you now . You can apply more stimulus than is needed, but that doesn’t mean you’re “locked in” to having to do even more next time. The idea that overload must always be proactively increased is a misconception. Put another way: progressive overload is not the proactive process of progressing the overload (i.e., increasing the sets, reps, or load lifted); it should be viewed in reverse: if you are able to progress, it’s because overload occurred [1, 2]. Therefore, a good training program must regularly meet the stimulus threshold needed to produce gains, and this threshold is based on what you’ve already adapted to. In strength training , this means establishing an appropriate volume (on average, which may change over a training plan) and increasing the load as you get stronger to maintain an appropriate intensity. (For example, what starts as 80% of your 1RM becomes 70%, then 60%, then 50% if you don’t adjust the load.) In hypertrophy training , this means establishing a given volume (which can also fluctuate) and increasing load or reps as you make progress to maintain the appropriate proximity to failure. (Otherwise, what was 1 RIR becomes 3, 4, and 5 RIR as you progress). Volume and intensity guidelines are covered in our Guide to Program Building . The Hypertrophy Progression System Explained This system emphasizes two key features: Rep range variation , which may enhance hypertrophy by stimulating different muscle fibers, leveraging different growth mechanisms, and reducing joint stress and fatigue. Autoregulated double progression , a method of progression that helps you stay within the right proximity to failure while driving increases in reps and load over time. (We covered this earlier.) Specialization cycles for advanced lifters are covered in the book, but outside the scope of the article. Rep Range Variation Rep range variation is built into our Ripped Body Training Programs and the bodybuilding-focused Muscle and Strength Pyramid example programs . There are many effective ways to incorporate rep range variation into your hypertrophy training. While rep range variation beyond the “traditional hypertrophy” range of 8–12 seems to be beneficial, no evidence indicates that any specific structure is superior to another. For example, while these differences were not significant, Schoenfeld and colleagues [3] and Dos Santos and colleagues [4] reported greater hypertrophy effect sizes favoring groups training with 2–30RM and 5–15RM, respectively, compared to groups training exclusively with 8–12RM. Specifically, Schoenfeld compared training every day with 8–12RM, against a daily undulating structure of heavy (2–4RM), moderate (8–12RM), and low-load (20–30RM) across the week. Dos Santos, on the other hand, compared two within-session structures of pyramid training: either 12RM, followed by 10RM, followed by 8RM, or 15RM, followed by 10RM, followed by 5RM. Finally, Carvalho and colleagues [5] reported significantly — albeit slightly — greater increases in quadriceps hypertrophy in a group that trained with a block structure to vary rep ranges, compared to a constant 8–12RM group. Specifically, the block structure was three weeks of 8–12RM, followed by three weeks of 1–3RM, and a final 5-week block of 8–12RM. However, you want to avoid spending too long (longer than ~3 weeks) exclusively training outside of hypertrophy guidelines. For instance, Bartolomei and colleagues [6] reported greater hypertrophy in a group of trained men who performed hypertrophy, strength, and power work in every session for 10 weeks, compared to a group that performed the same total volume over 10 weeks, but that organized training into three blocks: a 4-week hypertrophy block (10 x 10 at 1RIR on each exercise), followed by a 4-week strength block (6 x 3 at 2 RIR on each exercise), then a final 2-week power block (explosive exercises and plyometrics done with 5 RIR, or further from failure). The block-based group did about three-quarters of their volume in the first 4-week block, resulting in six weeks of subsequent, lower volume training, with the last two weeks of this six-week period, right before they measured hypertrophy, having the lowest volume and highest RIR — likely resulting in muscle loss. Together, these findings suggest two key principles: Rep range variation is probably beneficial for hypertrophy. Avoid long stretches of training completely outside hypertrophy guidelines (e.g., <6 reps with high RIR). Beyond that, you have a lot of flexibility in designing hypertrophy protocols. As a demonstration of this flexibility, Antretter and colleagues [7] found no significant differences in hypertrophy between groups that trained across the spectrum of 4–25RM, regardless of whether they did so in each session or with a different repetition target within this range on a week-to-week basis. This means you can vary reps: Within each session (with different rep ranges on different lifts). Between sessions (low-rep days and high-rep days within a week). Alternating by week. Alternating by mesocycle (provided each block includes hypertrophy-relevant rep ranges). You can see an example of how to do this in the Progression section of our Guide to Program Building . What To Do When You Plateau You’ll need to consider what to do when progress plateaus. Remember, the first step is determining whether you’re actually plateaued, which starts with realistic expectations for progression based on your training status, as shown in the table below. TRAINING STATUS DEFINITION AND ESTIMATED AVERAGE RATES OF PROGRESS Novice Able to add load and/or reps each time a lift is repeated in the same week or from week to week. This phase can last for years but may be as short as 6 months with consistent, progressive training, sufficient recovery, and effort. Intermediate Progress slows. You might add reps in the 10–20 rep range week to week, or add load in lower rep ranges month to month. With appropriate training, most reach this stage by year 1 and may remain here through years 4–5. Many never progress past it. Advanced Gains are much slower. You may add a rep or two in the 10–20 rep range month to month, or make small increases in reps or load in lower rep ranges over longer timeframes. Progress becomes increasingly difficult as you approach your muscular potential. Most lifters never reach this phase. If you have determined that you’re actually plateaued, see: How To Break Training Plateaus . If you have found this helpful, you might be pleased to know it is just a small section adapted from our best-selling Muscle and Strength Pyramid books . Join 200,000 other readers, get your copies here . Thank you for reading. Questions welcomed in the comments. – Andy References Helms, E.R. Chapter 6: Principles of Training. In Advanced Personal Training: Science to Practice, 2021. Nov 14 (pp. 81–91). Routledge. Minor, B., Helms, E.R., Schepis, J. RE: Mesocycle progression in hypertrophy: Volume versus intensity . Str Cond J, 2020. 42 (5): p. 121–4. Schoenfeld, B.J., Contreras, B., Ogborn, D., Galpin, A., Krieger, J., Sonmez, G.T. Effects of Varied Versus Constant Loading Zones on Muscular Adaptations in Trained Men . Int J Sports Med, 2016. 37 (6): p. 442–7. Dos Santos, L., Ribeiro, A.S., Cavalcante, E.F., et al. Effects of Modified Pyramid System on Muscular Strength and Hypertrophy in Older Women . Int J Sports Med, 2018. 39 (8): p. 613–8. Carvalho, L., Junior, R.M., Truffi, G., et al. Is stronger better? Influence of a strength phase followed by a hypertrophy phase on muscular adaptations in resistance-trained men . Res Sports Med, 2021. 29 (6): p. 536–46. Bartolomei, S., Zaniboni, F., Verzieri, N., Hoffman, J.R. New Perspectives in Resistance Training Periodization: Mixed Session vs. Block Periodized Programs in Trained Men . J Strength Cond Res, 2023. 37 (3): p. 537–45. Antretter, M., Färber, S., Immler, L., Perktold, M., Posch, D., Raschner, C., Wachholz, F., Burtscher, M. The Hatfield-system versus the weekly undulating periodised resistance training in trained males . Int J Sports Sci Coach, 2018. 13 (1): p. 95–103. Read Next: The Intermediate Powerlifting Sample Program The Intermediate Bodybuilding Sample Program How to Break Training Plateaus What is Realistic Progress While Cutting? About The Author Andy Morgan Hi! The Ripped Body® Method is an evidence-based, data-driven approach to physique transformation. ⠀ For the majority of my 20s, I fell for the scams of the fitness industry. ⠀ This site is my revenge. ⠀ Since 2011, I’ve written guides explaining how we get results to help readers avoid the same path of frustration. We’ve helped over 2,000 busy working guys transform their bodies WITHOUT supplements, fad diets, or the process dominating their lives. ⠀ Enter your email address in the box at the bottom of this page and I'd be honored to show you how. Got a question? Ask me below Please keep questions on topic, write clearly, concisely, and don't post diet calculations. 700 Label Name* Email* Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Got a question? Ask me below Please keep questions on topic, write clearly, concisely, and don't post diet calculations. Label Name* Email* Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Privacy policy . 326 Comments Terry January 31, 2026 10:21 Hi Andy, I’m curious as to why wave loading is considered less effective than autoregulated double progression. I find the predictability and simplicity of wave loading (and a scheduled deload week), helps keep me consistent and prevents me from pushing myself too hard and ultimately hampering recovery. Reply Author Andy Morgan February 1, 2026 08:43 Reply to Terry Hi Terry, thanks for the comment. I take it you read my email about the update and are curious as to why? It’s not that it’s less effective, it’s that it’s unnecessarily complicated. One of the key focuses of the third editions of the books was simplifying as much as possible. This change was one of those steps. Reply Ira January 19, 2026 09:22 Hey Andy. Did the RPE/RIR replace wave loading/liner Periodization. I’m currently doing linear periodization but just started a new month just past the deload week. Should I switch to this method? And if so how does this work in conjunction with the Intermediate Powerlifting routine for progression Reply Author Andy Morgan January 19, 2026 10:10 Reply to Ira Hi Ira, Yes, I made an update to the article when we released the new book at Christmas. (You’ll see a note at the top of the article.) I recommend using this progression method moving forward. You can use it with the intermediate powerlifting programs, but I’ll have another article sharing the Strength Progression System (which is a little more advanced and involved) soon. Reply Mil December 5, 2025 17:58 Great article! However I am a bit confused about deloads, in double progression especially you say: Take the 4th week as a light week (a deload week). and then in example table you actually only have a deload every 4th workout (not week). Is that a typo? So using double progression, is deload every 4th workout or week? Reply Author Andy Morgan December 6, 2025 08:59 Reply to Mil Hi Mil, thanks for the question and apologies for the confusion. You’re seeing the word “session” in the table and considering that to mean a workout. However, session in this case means unique training day (not any training day), and this progression system in first two MSP books was written for programs that only have the same session (unique training day) once every week. So, in this case, consider the word “session” to mean “week.” Reply Micah November 21, 2025 11:08 Hi Andy, I have a question regarding Deloading and Linear Periodization. I am using your Intermediate BB Prog I have moved a bunch of my Upper Body lifts to Linear Periodization (Bench, BB ROW, Sh. Press, Incline Press) and set them up on the same 4-week progression (deload every 4 weeks). Is that necessary? To have all my deloads on the same week? (I am concerned that some lifts may progress, while others might stall out, then everything would be wonky.) Thanks! Reply Micah December 6, 2025 10:24 Reply to Micah Did this question make sense? Hi Andy, I have a question regarding Deloading and Linear Periodization. I am using your Novice BB Prog. I have moved a bunch of my upper-body lifts to Linear Periodization (Bench, BB ROW, Sh. Press, Incline Press) and set them up on the same 4-week progression (deload every 4 weeks). Is that necessary? To have all my deloads on the same week? (I am concerned that some lifts may progress, while others might stall out, then everything would be wonky.) Thanks! Reply Author Andy Morgan December 7, 2025 06:51 Reply to Micah Hi Micah, sorry, I missed your question the first time you posted it. It’s not necessary, no. You could deload each independently when needed. Reply Alex November 19, 2025 06:28 Hi Andy, would double progression also work for compounds like it would for isolation exercises? I’m asking because it seems like wave loading may be difficult to track. Reply Author Andy Morgan November 19, 2025 14:07 Reply to Alex Yes. Reply Chris August 28, 2025 12:39 Does it ever make sense to switch back to linear progression after doing one of the more advanced progression techniques? For example, I would imagine that during a cut, especially if it’s not your first, one eventually can’t progress anymore and has to switch to periodization. When switching back to bulking, does it ever make sense to try linear progression again, since you’d expect to have more strength gains? Reply Author Andy Morgan September 1, 2025 07:28 Reply to Chris Hi Chris, thanks for the question. I’d stick with the intermediate progression. If you’ve stopped making progress by the end of your cut, I’d keep with the intermediate progression — this much is intuitive. If you were making progress with the intermediate progression, you might think you’d have a shot with novice progression. However, switching from a calorie deficit to a surplus isn’t like an immediate on-off switch for progress. It takes time for your body to return to an anabolic state (the hormones to return to normal and for you to be able to start building muscle tissue). There isn’t a clearly defined moment when you should switch, so unless you find the intermediate progression ridiculously easy, making the switch the obvious choice, I’d keep with it. Reply Reyes June 7, 2025 23:32 Hi. Suppose I finish linear progresión with the squat doing 4 sets of 8 reps each at 120 lbs (8x8x8x8 120lbs) and can’t add more weight anymore (125 lbs) and have to switch My progresision type to linear periodización. Should I start My next training session to, Say, 4 sets of 7 reps with 125 lbs? Would I be able to do this given that I couldn’t bump up the weight anymore with linear progression because I’m doing fewer reps? I feel like this would be too difficult even with the lower reps each week because I’d be adding weight to the bar. Should I try to work My work capacity first before moving up to linear periodization or should I jump straight into it? Thanks Reply Author Andy Morgan June 10, 2025 06:48 Reply to Reyes Hi Reyes, You’ve answered your own question! Lower the load a little (~10% perhaps) and build up from there. Reply Reyes June 10, 2025 08:27 Reply to Andy Morgan So how should my next session look like? 8x8x8x8 110lbs and then keep adding weight with lower reps each week as in linear periodization? Or should I take a couple of months building up my overall work capacity? Reply Author Andy Morgan June 10, 2025 14:18 Reply to Reyes Yes to the former. There is no reason to assume your work capacity is an issue. Reply Paul May 13, 2025 22:14 Hi Andy, I was following the intermediate powerlifting program. I have been ill for the past 2–3 weeks and have lost some strength. How can I assess what weight to lift now? Furthermore, which program would you recommend I follow, and how should I proceed with progression? I was following the linear periodization before. Reply Author Andy Morgan May 14, 2025 09:50 Reply to Paul Hi Paul, thanks for the question. Common for strength to be down after a few weeks off. Most people find it returns to normal within a few sessions. Go by the RPE guidelines in your program and lighten the loads as necessary. That’s what it’s for — to match the loads we choose with readiness to lift them. Reply Joe January 30, 2025 10:09 Hello Andy, another question came to my mind. Might be a dumb question but how does double progression look like if it more than 3 sets. For example, seated calf raises, 5 sets of 12-15. Do I keep the reps at 12 for the last 2 sets then try to get those up before progressing any further? Something like this 14,13,12,12 the next week 14,13,13,12 then 14,13,13,13 and so forth. Reply Author Andy Morgan January 31, 2025 12:05 Reply to Joe Hi Joe, Yes, that works! Reply Mil December 5, 2024 20:47 Hi Andy, great article! Is my understanding correct? Let’s say I did this in the past 6 months: Linear progression 3×8 until I hit the wall Linear periodization from 3×15 -> 3×8 until I hit the wall Now I am thinking, after 6 months, what should I do next: move further right on your scale to double progression? Or change rep ranges and continue with linear progression/periodization? Would it be good idea to continue like this: Linear progression 5×5 Linear periodization from 5×10 -> 5×5 Change exercises completely, start again… Only after nothing works, move to double progression Reply Author Andy Morgan December 6, 2024 12:15 Reply to Mil Hi Mil, great job so far. Here’s how to troubleshoot training plateaus . Reply Julian November 23, 2024 20:26 Just want to say this was very well explained, thank you ! Reply Author Andy Morgan November 25, 2024 07:27 Reply to Julian Thank you. Glad you found it helpful, Julian. Reply Elliott November 23, 2024 00:28 Hi Andy. For Linear Periodization is it more important to change the weight in consistent predictable sizes from week to week like shown in the graph or should I just hyper focus on meeting the RPE targets, regardless of if that means less predictable weight changes? Many Thanks and apologies if this has been answered before. Reply Author Andy Morgan November 25, 2024 07:28 Reply to Elliott Hi Elliott, RPE comes first. Reply Nicholas October 24, 2024 19:39 Hi Andy, if I’m doing 3 sets of back squats at reps of 12, 15, 15 and can’t lift the first set for more than 8 reps but can complete the last 2 sets of rep ranges of 15…would it be best to continue increasing the weight of the last 2 sets or avoid hitting failure until the last sets by just lowering the 1st set weight? I feel it’s important to mention that sets 2 & 3 have an increased 20% cumalative reduction in weight from the first set. Thank you. Reply Author Andy Morgan October 25, 2024 01:15 Reply to Nicholas Hi Nicholas, you’re describing reverse pyramid training . As you’ll see in that article, I’d recommend doing what I have in this article instead. If you struggle to do straight sets (the same load for each set), finding the first set considerably harder despite being the same load as the latter sets you may need to warm up better . Reply Hank July 14, 2024 08:15 Hi Andy, Have just finished reading your (excellent) Muscle and Strength Pyramid books. Seems to be a consistent message that volume will increase over a training career to maintain progress, and that too much volume can result in plateaued/suboptimal gains. Imagine a case where a minimum X volume 2-3 years into training will provide you with 90%+ of your maximum hypertrophy gains at that time. Say you exceed X by 50%, does your body adapt to this increased volume and thus end up needing to increase further and further from that point to continue gaining? Or is it purely a function of your size relative to genetic potential at any one time? Cheers, Hank Reply Author Andy Morgan July 15, 2024 15:43 Reply to Hank Hi Hank, I’m glad you enjoyed the books. No/yes. Thank you for the question! Reply Drew April 14, 2024 12:21 Hi Andy, Thanks this is really good. I’m also liking the new Intermediate 4 day training program and doing the updated 7 email course again. Any thoughts on a deload or decreasing when leading into cardio event such as a half marathon. In the past I didn’t worry about it and then in the last year stopped weight sessions a few days out from the event but now I’m giving it a lighter week or a week off. Thanks! Reply Author Andy Morgan April 16, 2024 06:19 Reply to Drew Hi Drew, Most welcome. I’m glad it’s useful. “…and then in the last year stopped weight sessions a few days out from the event, but now I’m giving it a lighter week or a week off. Thanks!” When I ran the Honolulu Marathon last year, I didn’t train my legs the week prior. Of the options you have presented, I doubt you’ll see a difference. Pick one you feel most comfortable with the idea of. Reply Drew April 16, 2024 12:37 Reply to Andy Morgan Great thanks Andy. Might leave the legs and have a lighter upper body the week prior. Reply Author Andy Morgan April 17, 2024 10:07 Reply to Drew Makes sense to me. Best of luck, Drew! Reply Radoslav April 10, 2024 01:50 Hi Andy! Which type of progression do you think would be best if I mainly want to increase the weight in my pull-ups? I was thinking about double progression in the 4-6 and 6-8 ranges, increasing the weight only when I reach the upper range in all series, but I don’t know if it will be the best choice, what do you think? Reply Author Andy Morgan April 10, 2024 07:28 Reply to Radoslav Hi Radoslav, See “Which progression system should I choose for exercise X?” in the FAQ. Reply Peter March 28, 2024 20:57 I have a question on Double Progression rule. When doing dumbbells and single leg, which is better linear or double progression? Reply Author Andy Morgan March 29, 2024 07:40 Reply to Peter Hi Peter, see “Which progression system should I choose for exercise X?” in the Q&A. Reply Peter March 29, 2024 13:18 Reply to Andy Morgan Got it. Reply Alex February 22, 2024 10:28 Thanks for the article! What’s your opinion on dynamic double progression? I’ve read it’s superior to standard straight sets double progression. Do you think it could be as effective as linear periodization? I’ve seen it described in two ways: When you reach the top end of the rep range, and all the remaining set reps are within the range, you increase the weight. When the first set reaches the top end of the rep range, you increase the weight on that individual set. The same goes for subsequent sets, tracking and progressing each set individually. Appreciate your input! Reply Author Andy Morgan February 22, 2024 14:04 Reply to Alex Hi Alex, thank you for the question. I think this gives the appearance of being superior, more than actually making much of a difference. 1) It’s a little more complicated, and people love to complicate. 2) It allows for the next load to be selected a little faster, and people are impatient. I’m a fan of simplicity. Reply Pat December 30, 2023 03:03 Hi Andy, Great article thank you! For double progression, is there a way to incorporate this in a way similar to linear periodization to where you’re decreasing your total volume week over week for several weeks before increasing it again? I understand that the whole idea behind linear periodization is to help decrease systemic fatigue week over week so you can recover better and then be able to increase volume after several weeks so double progression’s constant (though small) volume increase week over week kind of defeats this purpose. Just seeing your thoughts as I can’t think of a way to do it. Thanks! Reply Author Andy Morgan December 30, 2023 16:25 Reply to Pat Hi Pat, thank you for the question. “I understand that the whole idea behind linear periodization is to help decrease systemic fatigue week over week so you can recover better…” Not quite. In both linear periodization and double progression, the training stimulus ramps up over the weeks, just by different means. The purpose of the the deload after the hardest week is to give us a break, so we can deal with the accumulated fatigue. I recommend doing things as written. Reply Pat December 31, 2023 01:27 Reply to Andy Morgan Hi Andy, That definitely makes sense thank you for the reply! Have a great New Years! Reply Author Andy Morgan December 31, 2023 17:17 Reply to Pat Most welcome, Pat. You too! Reply David December 12, 2023 08:35 Hello there Andy,can I make progress every two or three weeks instead of four if I’m starting to use linear periodization? And by the same logic,can I make progress every five or six weeks instead of using more advanced methods once I’m pushing the limits of the intermediate stage? Reply Author Andy Morgan December 12, 2023 15:05 Reply to David Hi David, That wouldn’t be my default suggestion but feel free to try and see. Reply Load Rest of Comments Transform your body without the process taking over your life Get our free Transformation Kickstart course and start seeing results: Lose 1 lb of fat per week, without starving yourself. Beginner & intermediate training programs. A short daily lesson for two weeks to help you avoid the biggest mistakes. GET THE FREE COURSE Join 23,000+ readers. No supplement sales. Unsubscribe anytime. Articles Books Newsletter Results Podcast Coaching Our Why Our Team Contact FAQ Translations Privacy Terms Commercial Disclosure Search Search © 2011-2026 Ripped Body Japan LLC. All rights reserved. Ripped Body® is a registered trademark of Ripped Body LLC. × Scroll to Top Insert